"primary concerns"
"Being silent while the Government no longer requires cultural resources inventories prior to ground disturbing activity. By our silence we become complicit."
"Working with the communities we study"
"Allowing known sexual predators to still remain in the SAA and attend events (thus terrorizing their victims)."
"Living people - both archaeologists and community members (broadly defined to include both (esp.) descendant communities and broader publics)"
"How the SAA's handled the Yesnir case during the Albuquerque meetings. The SAA administration demonstrated that ethics were not of importance as they attempted to put the onus of the issue on a University instead of taking the time to address it. I think that the person handling social media at the time as well - I believe Oona - was blocking people on twitter and that violates our right to critique the SAA's as an institution. Rather than going about it in an ethical way, it showed the lack of support for women and Indigenous archaeologists that make up a majority of those in the field."
"An unordered list - 1. Data sovereignty on new or ongoing archaeological projects; 2. Sovereignty and cultural patrimony of existing collections and datasets; 3. Sexual and gender-based harrassment and violence; 4. Openness, transparency, and reproducibility of research results."
"Safety from harassment and violence of women and all gender-nonconforming people.
Relations between archaeologists and Native peoples.
Strengthening protections against looting and illicit sales of Native artifacts and remains."
"sexism, abusive behavior by field directors, plagiarism"
"Indigenous and descendent community relations, especially insofar as archaeology continues to participate in legacies of colonial violence in many places. NAGPRA compliance should be the number one concern of our field and professional organization, it should be absolutely unacceptable to have institutions, firms, and individuals drag their feet on NAGPRA.

Harassment of all kinds is endemic to archaeology and there must be zero tolerance for it in any archaeological venue or arena.

Improving relations with the public

Domination of professional archaeology sectors by a small handful of people connected to the same networks (i.e. SRI / SRIF / CfAS / LEAP / ARCUS). There's a real ethical need to broaden out who we listen to and support within professional archaeology.

Ensuring safe working conditions and fair labor practices for all working archaeologists, including a living wage for all full-time archaeologists (in all areas, i.e. academic, govt, private sector, etc.)"
"I see gender-based and sexual harassment as vital concerns, within the broader context of often abusive power relationships in academia, the workplace and the insular experience of fieldwork.

As job opportunities have become more scarce and also of lower quality (impermanent, part-time, low-paid, highly demanding), issues caused by systematic abuse of power by supervisors have deepened, and willingness to defend oneself or others has been eroded.

While I perceive the involvement of archaeologists in owning or even trafficking antiquities to have greatly lessened, I perceive that traffickers and collectors are becoming bolder recently and are challenging the authority of archaeologists, within a broader framework of fomenting disrespect for science and professional standards. We need to strategize about dealing with this.

Legal protections for heritage sites are being challenged, eroded and undone, and SAA has responded appropriately to work against these attacks. This situation requires further education and skill-building, both within and beyond our discipline."
"Balancing a project's integrity with efficiency in CRM. Providing a safe environment for professionals, students, and avocationals."
"Ethical use of big data, including proper attribution and credit, inclusion of contributors, and broad and consistent consultations with contributors outside academia such as CRM and the public."
"No one single concern; but several include:

1. Ethics of compliance archaeology, ranging from actually doing a survey where supposed to at the intensity claimed to appropriate historical background research to adequate report production.

2. Ethics of fieldschool archaeology, ranging from training students to do \"real\" archaeology and not dig cat holes to field documentation to actually producing reports of field investigations.

3. Ethics dealing with looting."
NA
"Relationships with indigenous populations and with the public"
"Looting; respectful treatment of colleagues, and subject communities; and during Covid-19, not taking the pandemic into remote communities."
"Understanding NAGPRA and the need for consultation. It the ethical thing to consider the cultural sensitivity of the people we study. Consultation before, during and after the research. 

Also  avoiding  political and economic pressures brought by contract archaeology programs. Ethically considering sites in terms of research , and cultural, significance not just the National  Register. Obligation to extend archaeology into site
Protection."
"Utilization of Museum Available Data"
"Protection of sites inside private lands"
"The work archaeology in environmental impact projects"
NA
"Women in the profession:
1) opportunities for women to have the same roles and funding and recognition as men have enjoyed
2) openly addressing a danger that the @MeToo sessions have exposed:  young women who have not been taught that women must not drink to helplessness in mixed gatherings.  So many of the @MeToo stories began with the woman drunk to the point of being unable to move, or passed out, and in that state, sexually assaulted.  This should not be swept under the rug in discussions of sexual harassment and exploitation.
3) again, revealed in the @MeToo sessions:  making it obligatory for directors of projects outside the U.S. and Canada, to spend a bloc of time explaining the host country's mores and customs.  Some of the @MeToo stories seemed to be American women misinterpreting customary courtesies and pleasantries of other socieites.
4) addressing the inequities that recent surveys have shown, for example that women faculty are still paid less than men, and that in spite of more Ph.D.s in archaeology granted to women than to men in the past decade, more men than women are being hired in academia."
"Indigenous leadership, capacity-building, co-msnagement, self-determination, and decolonizing archaeology"
"Racism, neocolonial research, sexual harassment, exclusionary work environments"
"Without doubt, the biggest concern for me is the inability of Native American populations--tribes--to have meaningful control over all of their associated archaeology... primarily, pre-Columbian. I think this can best be handled with either a revision to criterion D or the establishment of a new criterion specific to indigenous archaeology."
"Sexual intimidation, continued gender gap, lack of diversity, power abuse (by senior professionals), enormous crunch of academic workweeks, lack of clear societal impact of archaeological research."
"Preservation of sites.
Feed back to local communities who participate, common decisions taken.
Sexual harassment"
"Repatriation
Sexual harassment
Authorship of reports"
"Relationship with descendant communities
Treatment of employees
Harrassment"
"Representing Archaeology with Native Americans"
"Corruption especially croneyism in faculty recruitment leading to the development of a cadre of faculty dominated by technically incompetent and scholastically mediocre self-entitled overpaid twats."
"Racial discrimination against Native Americans."
"Sexual harassment"
"People are people but be respectful."
"1. Those working for public agencies are hampered by Federal/State/Local laws and regulations that conflict with ethical behavior, e.g. being forced to hire consultants that do not meet Secretary of Interior Standards.
2. Those working for private consulting companies that are pressured by clients to ignore or underconsider archaeological resources in completing studies.
3. General failure by the Academy (Undergraduate and Graduate Schools) to train archaeologists for public service, and by drawing a false dichotomy between academic research and public research.
4. Emphasizing the need to engage descendant communities in decision making on archaeological research, whether it be in the field or lab.
5.  Improving on the need for the professional archaeological community to reflect the larger population.  Many groups are greatly underrepresented and this lack of diversity makes implementing number 4 (above) more difficult.
6.  Oh yeah, continued sexual harassment in the profession, especially in the field, as well as bias in promotion and advancement. (I thought we had gotten past that until I attended the 2019 meetings in Albuquerque.)"
"Collecting and illegal trade of artifacts"
"Professional rewards, both in academic contexts and in commercial contexts, poorly align with ethical priorities. People can pay lip service to ethics, but still feel highly motivated to cut corners.

Ethical principles need to be much more integrated into the reward, recognition, and financial aspects of our profession. Otherwise, they can seem to be \"nice\" but tangential to our overall professional conduct and contributions."
"Lack of diversity among practitioners.  
Biased values of what types of archaeologists are best.
Lack of self reflection especially when considering archaeology's colonialist foundations. 
Payment of professionals (yes, even and maybe especially at the tech level)
Job security (yes, that is an ethical concern)
Sexual and gender harassment and discrimination"
"sexism in all its forms, harassment at workplaces,
rights and support for minorities"
"Archaeologists seem to use week methodologies and analytical techniques to support pet theories about the past.
Expropriation of indigenous knowledge and objects.
Rigid imposition of Western European world view and inability and unwillingness to consider and allow for other worldviews.
Women archaeologists struggle to get funding and are relegated to less visible positions and tasks.
Many archaeologists exploit unethical means to get funding.
Many archaeologists exploit unethical means to get published. 
Many archaeologists exploit insider connections to get their work heavily promoted in publications such as the New York Times and Guardian.
Harassment and subjugation of women by archaeologists."
"Meaningful consultation with Indigenous communities.
Intentional and \"unintentional\" destruction/disturbance of no-renewable archaeological resources"
"Political correctness."
"The ability to use collections (museum, repositories or legal owned international collections) in research with current excavated material remains (the ability to publish in AA or LAA with some leeway [or statement of caveat])

RPA or other SAA groups used to castigate other members without due processes

Support of 106 / CRM issues that can sustain university repositories or state repositories

Education of the public in finding value continuing supporting archaeology in a reasonable manner  towards different levels of responsibility. (Also, having a communications plan that supports responsible representation of archaeological practices on TV)

Supporting an academic infrastructure to create more Post-Doctoral appointments to create avenues to get young members into a decreasing system of tenure in university systems -- why have membership grow if CRM and University positions are becoming more restricted during a second recession during these last two decades? 

Acknowledging that international members (Latin American) have different standards and practices in dealing with archaeological ethics (e.g. the idea of consultation with indigenous groups that have ownership stake in the area, but have recently migrated to the region). 
"
"The need to share more knowledge of cultural heritage sites while ensuring their conservation, allowing for their destruction for necessary development, and ensuring the continuance and resurgence if indigenous lifeway's."
"Agency not listening to their own experts who are there due to laws and acting like they did not know they have to follow them or that they even exist. My agency is in every state of the union-this is criminal that we allow people to be Management and paid to be and do not know the basic laws."
NA
NA
"Interactions with historically marginalized communities"
"Exploitation and abuse due to skewed power dynamics (especially women/POC/LGBTQ) 
No consequences for unethical behavior



"
"Cookie cutter approach to regulatory compliance in CRM.  Failure to publish in academia post-field school.  Failure to curate in CRM"
"Lack of respect, poor prioritization of focus on doing the right thing"
"Accountability, Stewardship, and Records/Reporting. Our relationships with tribes in particular are very important to consider. Not just having a relationship, but diving deeper to the possibilities and also the limitations of work with tribes and descendant communities. Records and Reporting is a constant issue - we need to provide more money/resources to make sure complete records and information are  accessible in perpetuity. Social justice is a concern that intersects with ethics in ways that I don't understand fully - e.g., how much activism is, or should be, a part of our roles as archeologists?"
"in no order:

1) How we as archaeologists treat each other; specifically, as conversations about interpersonal abuses of power (sexual harassment, labor exploitation, unsafe work conditions) become more public, there is a need for clear and firm standards that can hold archaeologists at all ranks accountable for illegal and uncollegial behavior.

2) Our relations with stakeholder communities, including but not limited to descendants, who have a vested interest in and are exposed to present-day social and political and economic risk by archaeological and heritage projects.

3) New challenges in digital archaeology, related to data sharing and data preservation, etc.

4) Preservation of the archaeological record, not only sites and landscapes but especially collections which have been given little ethical attention and as a result, are routinely exposed to risk of damage and loss. I am still so horrified that archaeologists excavate or conduct survey without being required to pre-identify and pre-pay for permanent curation of artifacts, samples, and data.

"
NA
"For me, it is teaching the difference between the ethical practice and conduct of professional archaeology versus the popularized, media version."
"I believe sexual and moral harassment are the major concerns in the field."
"NAGPRA, relationships with tribes, and productive relationships with avocationals"
"Data integrity, safety, behavior during fieldwork"
"Reporting and publications of results is lacing among most archaeologists.

Most archaeologists I know don't care about public education and outreach. 9-5 job and not willing to volunteer to give a public talk, etc. other than maybe once a year at an archaeology fair."
"Respect for the integrity of the archaeological record.

Mutual respect among archaeologists."
"Looting and heritage conservation"
NA
"Responsibilities to multiple conflicting stakeholders
Creating workplaces that are safe and accessible for all"
"Receiving support for report writing, analysis, and museum fees so that professional obligations can be met. My institution doesn't understand or support activities that do not result in publications.
"
"Museums and the \"property\" of smuggled, looted, robbed, exiled heritage"
NA
"I think there are several ethical concerns that are important in the field today, but I personally see the accurate collection of data and reporting of results in a timely manner as one of the most important. All archaeological work should be written up in some form and made available. As an archaeological collections manager, it is one of the most frustrating aspects of the job to have a collection that was the result of archaeological survey, but no survey narrative was ever written (and in some cases, no field notes exist). This makes that collection useless - we shouldn't be collecting data if we aren't going to publish it in some form (even just as gray lit)."
"Sexual harassment
"
"1. Gender inequality and sexual harassment
2. Lack of respect for Native American knowledge claims and positions re: archaeology
3. CRM profiteering at the expense of 1, 2, and science in general
4. Looting (sadly, always and forever an issue...)"
"How we treat one another in the professional world. How professionals interact with collectors -- both those we label as responsible as well as those who are looters. Long-term curation responsibilities. Interactions with descendant populations and \"rights\" of professional archaeologists to data."
"lack of primary data provided by researchers"
"*Paying lip service to diversity and not fully embracing the ethical dimension of diversity for the practice of archaeology; 
*Sexual harassment and the push-back against calling it out as an ethical issue;
*The responsibility of archaeologists to descendant communities."
"equality for all regardless of sex, race, etc."
"Engaging in conduct involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit, or misrepresentation about archaeological matters

Low-balling costs for contract archaeology investigations and agencies accepting investigations that do not meet the reasonable and good faith standard under Section 106

Unwilling to discourage exaggerated, misleading, or unwarranted statements about archaeological matters that might induce others to engage in unethical or illegal activity"
"sexual harassment, poor contract work, insufficient state standards that encourage or even require crm work to be poor"
"Trade in antiquities"
"I see none."
"Discrimination generally (including sexual harassment, gender and age, and by race) - both in professional, academic, and field settings. 

Interactions with descendant and local communities, how those interactions occur, and the ways in which those interacts are beneficial for those communities. 

Public outreach and the importance of education about the misuse of archaeological data."
"Treatment of human remains, plagiarism of intellectual property, public education"
"Community impact, ecology"
"Archaeologists have hijacked the NHPA for their own purposes and largely do a terrible job at engaging with descendant communities with trust and respect."
"Guidelines for practice"
"stewardship/protection of resources and working with local/descendant populations"
"Exploitation or total disregard for local communities
Archaeological evaluations unduly influenced by the sponsoring agency or private industry

"
"Practitioners' maintenance of colonial attitudes towards indigenous groups
Sexual harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct and a lack of accountability
The CRM industry's role in monetizing the past"
"Professional responsibility to public and colleges. Stewardship and issues of retaining artifacts with limited space to keep them."
"bringing community members into research agendas (avoiding being extractive); handling and publishing human remains; avoiding sexual misconduct in the field/ lab/ classroom; and making the discipline accessible to diverse people (from disparate ethnic, social, and economic backgrounds)"
"Keeping archeological practice as objective and apolitical as possible."
NA
"Honesty in reporting and conducting fieldwork and results; integrity and honesty in communication with clients."
NA
NA
"sexual misconduct and abuse of authority, indigenous rights, antiquities trafficking, conservation"
"Dealing with human remains. Obligations to descendant communities. Sites chosen for field schools and research in general. Regarding the latter, it strikes me that there are huge quantities of threatened sites throughout the country that require attention.  How should a balance be struck in focusing fieldwork and available funding n light of the Stewardship principle ion the code of ethics?"
"Sexual and other harrassment"
NA
"-- professional conduct in field contexts

-- commercialization of antiquities"
"In my opinion, I see access, preservation, and privacy as being topics of heightened concern and/or discussion."
"Publication of excavation/survey results; inadequate credit to colleagues, especially students, including conscious or unconscious plagiarism;"
"Returning control of sites, belongings, and landscapes to rightful Indigenous owners. 
Assuring that all professionals cease assuming personal ownership / control of sites/collections/data.
Assuring that collaborations with non-professionals maintain near-perfect commitments to non-commodification of site, collections AND contribute to addressing / discouraging / punishing / remediating damages from archaeological resource crime."
"Not in order of importance:
1. Protection of antiquities from various private and govenrmental interests
2. Problems of the antiquities trade (black market), looting, illegal excavation
3. Problems of standards of excavation in both contract and academic archaeology (note that I am working in the Near East)
4. Problems of poor publication and poor access to materials
"
"The fear of reason. The tendency to sacrifice data and potential future inquiry for today's ideological orientations. When contemporary discomfort with aspects of past practices in the field leads to straw-person reaction and wholesale tarring of past practices rather than reasoned contextualization to learn and improve for future. Engagement with a variety of thought perspectives, ie diversity and inclusion, does not have to look like wholesale condemnation of the past but rather a collective of ideals."
"Archaeologists in government service and in consulting sometimes report to or are supervised by non-archaeologists (often specialists in some other field) who are not required to subscribe to any code of archaeological ethics or practice.  They, often in spite of expert advice, often make decisions that are inconsistent with either.   A reaction such as resigning from a position is not likely to change that decision.  This is particularly problematic for young professionals in a particularly difficult job market. 

I don't have even a suggestion of a solution to this problem so this is really just an observation."
"1). Lack of involvement of indigenous people in the archeological studies we conduct and the continued marginalization of the people we supposedly helping by stewarding the past for them. Being good stewards of the past should mean there is substantial input, involvement, and direction from indigenous people. 

2). Continued lack of progress with NAGPRA for both affiliated and unaffiliated remains/objects. 

3). Unconstrained use of metal detectors on battlefield sites across the U.S. using non-sampling strategies. 

4). Fairness for all people in the workplace. 

5). Minimal use of previously excavated collections."
NA
"Sexual harassment, unfair treatment or access to resources based on sex, race, etc."
"Inclusion of indigenous communities. Actively dismantling the structures that have led to animosity between indigenous groups and archaeologists, and again actively creating relationships that not only invite indigenous groups to participate but seek out consultation with indigenous groups and provide back to the descendant community"
"The primary ethical concerns in the field today are in 1) how we address the issues of community/Indigenous interaction and control over data and interpretations versus the scientific and public responsibilities to accurately and completely report data and our own interpretations, and 2) how do we increase diversity in the field without resulting to tokenism?"
"Cultural resource protection, stopping the antiquities trade, educating the public about the role and value of archaeology."
NA
"Things that have some up (not in order)

adjunct v. tenure track teaching
training PhD students when there are few jobs
human remains - why is it 'wrong' to study these v. other cultural objects? 
making results accessible to public v. scientific obligations, which always come first
"
"From a CRM perspective, I think large and small CRM companies should be held to high standards when it comes to quality of work and treating a resource with the appropriate level study. It seems that there is a bit of variability when comparing one company's scope of work with another's for a similar level of effort. Technically acceptable work should be just as important as price."
NA
"1) Involvement of Native American Tribes and Nations in project consultations, fieldwork, and the presentation of results at conferences and publications.
2) Doing archaeology for large development projects (pipelines/cell towers/etc. federally funded or not) thoroughly and responsibly with adequate tribal input."
"Commitment to Indigenous communities
Stewardship and preservation of archaeological record
Preservation of records
Public education and outreach
Intellectual property rights
"
"Responsibilities to descendant/engaged communities, authorship/acknowledging data ownership, stewardship, supporting access to collections"
"Sexual harassment"
"Concerns used to be about the practice of archaeology and its implications for the discipline; recently those concerns seem more focused on broader societal problems within which archaeology is an academic discipline."
"The excavation and analysis of skeletal remains and funerary objects of American Indians in the United States."
"The lack of objectivity in the reporting and presentation of archaeological data and interpretations.  I see the increasing tendency to present (or distort) archaeological data to support particular political agendas as a threat to the very foundation of our discipline.  The 20th Century provides two frightening case studies where manufactured claims about the past were used to buttress odious political regimes. The fashionable post-modern 'multi-vocality' of the past stance has reached its logical conclusion with the current American administration. As such, I believe our paramount ethical obligation is to preserving and presenting the unvarnished representation of the past."
"Way too much archaeology is being done by people of European extraction using the sites and data from indigenous victims of colonialism without any consent whatsoever. Careers are still being built with no thought about toward how wrong this is."
"Two main areas-- our ethical responsibility to the resources being primary, and then to ourselves and other stakeholders as professional people, stewards, and educators."
"Public accessibility of data"
"sexual misconduct, pay gap between men and women, paying people a living wage, consulting the communities our work affects, ensuring the communities values history, and viewpoints are respected"
"1. Contractors that cut corners to make a profit resulting in damage or loss of archaeological properties.

2. Not enough public education regarding preservation."
"The blurred boundary between professional archaeology, informal curiosity about the past, and professional salvage.
In essence, making clear to the public - what is archaeology."
"Fieldwork standards & best practices in the CRM sector.
Indigenous peoples' access to and influence over cultural resources.
"
"Qualifications
Harassment and discrimination"
NA
"Many archaeologists limit their ethics teaching to a rather simple conservation-centered and universalist ethic. Increasingly introductory classes are opening up discussions of contestation and sovereignty in archaeology, and more professionals are questioning a strict universal heritage framing. Our ethics statements should reflect this sophistication."
"\"Client science\" rather than hypothesis-driven, honest evaluations of issues/problems.  Consultants can come under a great deal of pressure to find on the side of the entity paying the bills."
"Respect for both indigenous peoples, as well as for objectivity"
"Looting, sale of artifacts. 
Destruction of sites.
Poor oversight of CRM industry."
"Humanizing cultural remains."
"Low-ballers in CRM and the powerless responses to them by agencies and fellow CRM practitioners. 
Collectors/looters and how to interface or collaborate with them as a professional archaeologist.
Exploitative practices in hiring and using archaeological field techs."
"Equity and access"
"Integrity of the research process, data."
"Incorporating the views of outside groups into how archaeologists use cultural property and its interpretation. It seems to me this a fundamental problem, because outside folks are not necessarily focused on our goals. Thus, obligations are one-sided and we cannot expect others to act similarly. That's a structural problem. 

The conflict goes to the heart of the primary goals of archaeology, which I believe is to get to an objective truth, although we will likely never get there. Nonetheless, the goal is important to me, and if I was just story-telling, I wouldn't do it. This runs smack dab against the idea of accommodating other interpretations to incorporate other versions of the \"truth.\" This goes beyond trivial examples like accommodating a biblical literalist's truth about the age of the earth. Tribes, religions, collectors, nations, past peoples and on and on - they all are affected by what we do.

It's a very complex problem, and it stems in part from an anthropological view of culture as something that is recreated constantly, incorporating and discarding parts in the process. If a culture's past is recreated in the present, then that becomes it's \"truth.\" If that's its present view, and we are required to incorporate it into our discipline, then we will, on occasion, have to discard our primary goal.

Having said all that, I do believe we must \"seriously consider\" other viewpoints, however that is defined. It is both an ethic and simple politeness. But if truth is the goal, then other viewpoints will always be judged, and sometimes judged as having no value. Probably, most of the time it will not cause much conflict. The problem is when the interpretation of the ethic is that the conflict requires an archaeologist to discard the primary truth goal. 

Sorry for the preachy tone.

"
"equality for female archaeologists, sexual harassment, equality for archaeologists from minority populations"
"In Brazil, what has been most pertinent, since before the recognition of the profession of Archaeologist in the country, just over two years ago, is the poor relationship of archeology professionals with each other and with some Brazilian institutions: universities; the Brazilian Archeology Society (SAB); and the National Historical and Artistic Heritage Institute (IPHAN), a government agency. The noise between these agents has contributed to the failure to establish Archeology as an indispensable scientific discipline for the development of the nation in different social parameters. In addition to other issues related to the respect and recognition of our people, past and identity."
NA
"Control of the scholarship process has been completely corrupted by a small number of people and groups who are very good at self promotion."
NA
"Personal safety, equability, and engagement/collaboration with descendant communities"
NA
"Sexual violence, gender discrimination, lack of true diversity, and unethical and problematic conduct by the most senior and well established members of the field and the academia who use their positions to evade responsibility and to foster institutional gas-lighting."
"Publishing credit
Professor - student relations
handling of human remains/repatriation"
"CRM regulatory agencies or individual regulators who lack the experience to make ethical and sound archeological decisions."
"Equity and inclusion"
"Governments destroying cultural sites and re-writing the history to suit their political ideology. Also, Tribes declaring that certain objects are sacred. I understand burials and artifacts that are important, but this is a slippery slope when any bead found during a project calls for calling up the Tribe."
"Looting and site preservation"
"Who \"owns\" the past."
"Full cooperation with descendant communities
Archaeology by, for, and off Indigenous peoples
Stewardship"
"In my research context in postcolonial nation-states, collaborative work with descendant/local populations. Also, student safety (primarily women students and male project directors and/or colleagues)."
NA
"Protecting the free flow of information and supporting scholarship even when this comes into conflict with other \"stake holders\"."
"artifact collection and selling for profit, lack of understanding of the significance of grave goods or associated material by the general public."
"Sexism in the workplace/university setting and plagerism."
"Abuse of power by professional academics to achieve personal interests.
Lack of international collaboration. 
Lack of discourse in the US about the international scope of archaeology. 
Lack of support for graduate students (mental health, financial, resources about career opportunities outside of academia).
"
"People who claim to be archaeologists doing extremely questionable, or in some cases downright unethical/illegal, things and calling it archaeology. Underwater/maritime archaeology, especially, has a problem with \"archaeologists\" hired by commercial salvage/treasure hunting firms who directly violate ethical statements concerning recovering objects for sale or to \"pay\" investors. The growth in popularity of TV, and to some extent other media, shows with \"archaeologists\" engaging in unethical behavior. I don't know how SAA, or any other archaeological organization, could possibly control that, but promoting our code of ethics and educating the public about what real archaeology is seems to be crucial and needed."
"1) Altruistic staff making judgement without knowing or seeking to know the facts. 2) Clients expecting archaeologists to compromise in ethics."
"Carrying for the archaeological record. I am VERY concerned about the drift of SAA ethnics into social issues. Enshrining best practices for business (e.g., sexual harassment) into the SAA ethnical guideline dilutes the utility of the ethical code and makes it less useful, given that the SAAs provides the ONLY meaningful ethical code focused on the archaeological record. I don't know of any ethical code that endorses sexual harassment. Having one more code of ethnics that focuses on it accomplishes nothing. Having a well-formed code of ethics focused on dealing with the archaeological record can accomplish a great deal."
"Scientific misconduct"
"The virtual self-criminalization of standard archaeological practices (e.g., analysis of mortuary remains, dating of skeletal material, long-term curation of \"items of cultural patrimony\" for future research) and the attempt by the SAA to throw the supposed \"looters\" (amateurs) under the bus.  Academic institutions want special exemptions from returning items to interested parties, but also want the private \"black market\" in antiquities to be globally criminalized.  The SAA has become so mired down in situational ethics that it has no credibility in this arena."
"I am concerned about issues surrounding sexual harassment."
"College and university field work instructors who excavate sites year after year and fail to publish reports of their investigations and findings."
"Sexual harassment and how this influences students and others in their work and their graduate education."
"Records and preservation."
"stakeholder communities, collection/publication of mortuary remains, site access, land development, art market"
"- Collaboration with Indigenous People
- Sexual misconducts"
"data about people, social groups and organisations being unintentionally revealed
Business organisation ethics in practice"
"Equitable consideration of the concerns and interests of all stakeholders, including archaeologists, universities, museums, the government, Native Americans and other descendent populations, the public, science in general, etc."
"Dealing with harassment, sexual assault, and retribution within field contexts, academic/CRM institutional structures, and at the Annual Meeting; Stewardship of archaeological resources; Advocacy for the past and community partners within broader publics and governmental systems."
"Respecting Native American perspectives and concerns over the course of the Section 106 process.

Cronyism in contracting.

Incompetence."
"Working with nonarcaelogists consulting on CRM projects and educating the public"
"working with descendant communities in a more meaningful and collaborative way

the well being and safety of everyone in our field (sexual harassment allegations, etc.)

the care of the cultural resources - proper dissemination, curation, or repatriation"
"trafficking in artifacts
working with descendent communities in finding solutions that are positive for both the communities and the advancement 
     archaeological knowledge."
"In no particular order:
relations between archaeologists, descendant communities, and other stakeholders
harassment/abuse/assault in the field and in other contexts
striking a balance between site preservation, student training, and research needs
integrating existing collections more effectively into research
using the outcomes of CRM work in research and education"
"Stopping collecting and looting"
"Most of the concerns in the principles of ethics are still relevant. Four concerns stand out in 2020:

1. Discipline-wide backwardness in the handling of sexual behavior and sexual mis-conduct in the workplace, specifically in field situations.
2. Failure to follow medical, geological, and ecological scientists in promoting data sharing and data availability.
3. Failure to formally define obligations to include descendant population perspectives into the public interpretation of archaeological results and the disposition of archaeological remains.
4. Failure to formally define the relationship between stewardship and conservation advocacy.
"
NA
"Protection of cultural resources despite ongoing reduction in resources and attacks. (seems by far the most important issue at the moment)
Protecting native rights, students, and citizens.
Ethical research and publishing practices."
"Accountability to stakeholders needs to rank among the top. Also, safety (including issues of sexual assault and harassment) for practitioners and students is an important concern."
"Challenges in consulting archaeology when there is a \"race to the bottom\" over price
Relationships and responsibilities with various indigenous communities
Appropriate response when in government service and requested to take positions or actions that violate principles
Appropriate actions to take when facing harassment claims - how to balance all positions
How to insure that materials, records and especially digital data are available in the future
How to balance the loss of information that results when materials from collectors are not investigated because such will increase value especially when collectors often have acquired objects of \"high art\" value 
How to balance conflicting claims where multiple legitimate communities of interest (e.g. developers, community, indigenous populations, archaeologists) have conflicting POVs
How to increase archaeological visibility of previously overlooked communities - such as enslaved peoples, minority communities etc.
"
"How we treat one another, racism, sexism, sexual harassment and assault, classism, high costs of field schools, ableism, heterosexism"
"1. Sexual harassment of staff and field workers

2. Lack of publication of results

3. Poor long term curation of artifacts and notes

"
"Sexual assault, both in the field and in the classroom/office.
Neocolonialism, or perpetuating colonial relationships through fieldwork practice and publishing.
Appropriating indigenous knowledge without giving proper credit."
"I'm a consultant.  Primary ethical concerns focus on appropriately advising clients on best way to avoid impacts to cultural resources and to address project effects when resources cannot be avoided.  also providing fair pricing for work proposed on for clients."
"1 - organizations need to update policies regularly for changing situations  (25 years is beyond too long)
2 - giving descendant and other communities full say in interpretation, research design, etc. 
3 - prevention of harassment in all its forms
4 - means of encouraging change in non-punitive ways for those willing but who don't know what they don't know, or are not able to see how their behavior affects others (consciousness raising)"
"The conservation ethic, specifically with people STILL digging up sites that aren't threatened with no good planning and funding for the long-term stewardship of data and collections. Collections stewardship is another, and the lack of support for collections and collections-based research in general, because collections-based work supports a conservation ethic but is not necessarily seen as \"real\" archaeology or new research. In CRM there are a lot of issues with keeping the budget down leading to quick, shoddy work with lack of follow-through maintaining the results long-term (digital data management, sufficient analysis and report writing time, curation, etc.). The tendency is to dig, dig, dig, when it should be to think, plan, synthesize, and only dig when you have to. 

I believe open access to data is another ethical obligation we have to the public who funds most archaeology. We need to rethink policies about site location confidentiality, instead focusing on community engagement in protection rather than secrecy within the ivory tower."
"Ethically engaging with the public, especially disadvantaged or minority groups on whose sites research may be conducted."
NA
"Data protection. Conflicts with clients regarding the nature and scope of protection for cultural resources"
"stewardship and preservation"
"collections management -- who get's what?

distribution of digital information -- locational information

hiriing a professional workforce when OPM fails to recognize SOI standard for qualifications."
"My primary concern is for archaeologists to ensure descendant communities'' voices and concerns are addressed and incorporated in their work.  
Human remains must be treated with respect and as the descendant communities see fit.
Collections reform should consider descendant communities' concerns about the appropriate resting place for those objects.
I believe compliance with state and federal laws as well as project specific negotiated agreements is important.
Our job is to protect the resource.
"
"Money"
"Working responsibly with avocationals, the use of private funding in research, the conservation of the archaeological record."
"Continued failure to adequately address harassment in all settings - classroom, field schools, CRM, academia, and conferences."
"Understanding of public vs private information, archaeologists thinking they own the data they get in CRM archaeolgy, issues of addressing descendent communities' rights to their data, NAGPRA, in the field ethics"
"Looting and antiquities trade
Lack of openness in publication, and data archiving"
"The dominance of capitalism and commercialism among professional archaeologists rather than ethical standards"
"Boundless self-promotion at others' great expense, ad-hominem (and ad-feminam) reviews, sexism, suppressing data that don't fit one's ideas, as well as the usual greed, pretension -- same as always!"
"Museum repatriation (international and NAGPRA), cooperation with descendant and local communities, engaging with the public, harassment/discrimination within the field, overproduction/underemployment of PhDs"
"Primacy of a neoliberal, positivist-oriented ethos that justifies everything through emic practice rather than a thoughtful consideration of non-archaeological interests and legacy effects.

Lack of recognition of how our discipline has historically caused great harm to local communities, foreign governments, and our colleagues.

Resistance to transparency and data sharing.

Lack of applicability to modern issues of life and death."
"Collaboration with descendent communities and non-archaeology stakeholders"
"
all of the original ethical issues identified still seem pertinent, though perhaps may need some tweaking. Some of the issues that may fit within the original principles with some adjustment:
working with teams/co-authors in an ethical/equitable manner
records and preservation seems much more at risk these days as museums move to 'de-colonize' in ways that devalue archaeology (not arguing that de-colonization is bad, just the way some may be doing it)
reporting/preserving field notes in a responsible manner (not just publishing, but good old fashioned documenting of what you actually did in the field)"
"Indigenous inclusion in archaeology

Sexual assault/harassment in the field 

"
"Curation of collections, esp. for use in the future
Coordination with descendant communities
Assurance of intellectual freedom to access, interpret and publish from archaeological data
"
"Indigenous collaboration, working with other people's ancestors and history."
"The primary ethical concern for the field today is adequately protecting women and female-identifying individuals from harrassment and assault.

-

Setting this challenge aside (as it is being addressed by SAA in other venues), the primary ethical concern that I encounter on regular basis in my work as a public (CRM/professional) archaeologist is the lack of professional standards. There are two issues of professionalism in the field that concern me. 

The first is the quality of training at the undergraduate and MA levels. I would not describe the current status of archaeological education as \"adequate\" under Principle 8. BAs do not prepare students to work in the field. In my experience, MA standards are also often so low that recent graduates are unable to accomplish basic necessary work (e.g. fully recording their excavations, hand-mapping, setting up excavation units, calculating distances in relationship to data, etc.). As a result, CRM professionals are often not empowered to challenge unethical behavior because their training has not equipped them to evaluate the boundary between good and bad practice. This cultivates the attitude that \"that's the way things are done\" in the field, another factor encouraging a culture of silence that has numerous other negative effects (now well-documented). Add onto this the precarity of employment among entry- and early-professional-level archaeologists, and it is impossible to expect good practice to result.

The second issue of professionalism is the lack of publication in peer-reviewed venues. I do not believe that Principle 6 adequately addresses the most important underlying imperative for peer-review: oversight of practice by qualified outsiders. If data recovery projects are undertaken to preserve archaeological data as a mitigation measure, it is difficult to justify them if the data they produce are rarely (or never) evaluated in the literature. When CRM projects are reviewed by other CRM professionals only, and the field lacks a single, necessary venue for dissemination of this type of archaeological data (in the form of appropriate peer-reviewed journals accessible to all professional archaeologists), then unqualified or unscrupulous archaeologists can continue to practice. Beyond that, they can do so with a competitive advantage because of their ingorance of good practice and/or their willingness to ignore their duties. This implicates the entire field's responsibility to the archaeological record (under Principle No. 1) and to the public (under Principle No. 2).

-

Another ethical concern that I regularly encounter is the unrealistic assumptions about what a career in the field looks like in 2020. University-based research and teaching faculty at 2- and 4-year institutions train students, but they usually do not prepare them to work as archaeologists. A single field school is not sufficient preparation for field practice, and does not satisfy Principle No. 8. As a result, BAs are expected to learn on the fly in CRM. The very tight schedules and the very low budgets do not leave room for learning on the job. The result is a workforce of seasonal/hourly BAs, undertrained and overqualified (on paper). 

The underlying ethical concern, however, is how the field treats those individuals. A new graduate can reasonably be expected to have five figures of student debt (or more, if they have attended some amount graduate school [whether they completed their course of study or not]). They are then expected to spend multiple years gaining CRM experience as hourly or project-specific employees, subject to schedules outside of their control and often without access to support in the form of healthcare or other employment benefits. This set of affairs is excellent - for the owners of CRM companies who can exploit their employees without having any responsiblity to them, for the academic archaeologists who rely on unpaid labor to generate data for publications, and for the industries that seek out the least-qualified consultants they can to conduct \"oversight\" of their projects. 

The field must dedicate more care to training new archaeologists at every level and to ensuring that the next generation has the opportunity to succeed. The over-production of BA and MA students and the lack of opportunties for the overwhelming majority of them is shameful. The unrealistic expectations of students, who do not know any better, and academic archaeologists, who do know better, must change. Given my experiences, I ask myself why the field should expect to attract and retain talented young students who will perform their professional duties ethically. And this is not only a question of professional ethics or of ensuring the robustness of archaeology in the future. It is even more fundamentally a question of decency and morality."
"Balancing obligation to steward the past with our obligation to local and descendant constituents."
"I think our fields primary ethical concerns are regarding public outreach and education and the recording and preservation of cultural remains. I see these two areas as interwoven, and as stewards, it is our duty to fulfill both of these things. With concerted outreach and education initiatives, we can further the preservation of cultural remains by making laypersons aware of the necessity of preservation, as well as laws that protect remains on private property."
"In no particular order of priority:

1. gender equality in all areas, e.g., pay, tenure, promotion, treatment
2. 'closure' on the final disposition of survey and/or excavation materials by investigators BEFORE their demise.  The society should offer alternatives for PIs to pursue with dignity, recognizing the limitations of time, money, and the interventions of life.
3. set standards and variable limits on expectations for research results BEFORE seeking funds for field work.  Not every project can be expected to plumb the depths and extents of technology before proceeding, much less publishing.  They shouldn't be punished for that in critical review or, worse still, delaying publication to avoid the former."
"The conflict between good scientific practice and business ethics.  Money tends to be driving activity nowadays at the expense of long term detailed research.  some innjov attire young archaeologists (and some that are not so young) are able to combine sound business practices with good quality archaeology, but most of it seems driven by 
Federal and State statute at the expense of science.  It requires real talent and effort to extract maximum scientific information from a project and stay within the budget.  /Yoo after, the sole goal is compliance with minimal legal requirements."
"Sustainable curation and stewardship of archaeological collections in repositories"
"Physical and emotional safety of individuals in vulnerable situations (in the field, in educational settings); need to advocate for the protection of archaeological resources (including waiving of legal mandates in the name of security); protection of archaeological sites and artifacts in regions of conflict; incursion of debt in the course of gaining an education unlikely to yield a job with a living wage and benefits"
"Our obligations and expectations to descendants and other marginalized communities."
"Consulting with stakeholders while simultaneously encouraging research."
"Research integrity; harassment and intimidating behavior; sexual harassment/assault in the field, at conferences, in professional conduct; integrity of data and data analysis; inconsistent practices and understandings of embargoed theses, dissertations, and other publications especially when they are based on publicly funded research; appropriate attribution of scholarship even when printed scholarship is not digitally available; self-plagiarism in publications; conflicts of interest, especially regarding non-federal sources of research funding."
"clear statements about addressing historical inequalities

clear statements about addressing different forms of gender imbalance in the field

clear statements about fair treatment of those who have been accused of sexual harassment but who have not been   adjudicated"
NA
"Misappropriation of data; treatment of human remains; student safety; status of women and minorities in the profession"
"During fieldwork/related to research: Do no harm to local/indigenous communities 
Among ourselves: Treat other archaeologists in a respectful unbiased manner"
"Acknowledging the role of indigenous voices and other interested parties (other descendant groups), collector groups. 

Accountability -- still a great one.

Intellectual property -- esp. as it relates to indigenous knowledge or other groups.

Public connections/engagements -- more important than ever.  

Commercialization -- still critical."
"treatment of women in the field and professional and educational institutions. Also involvement of public in archaeology. Growing disparity and hostility between educational pursuits vs CRM."
"Engendering safe, professional, workplace environments free of harassment and discrimination."
"Establishing an ethical performance standard when in a working relationship with Native American field personnel. Native field personnel recognize sites not within the archaeological taxonomic purview and when encountered during professional and Tribal conjoined surveys, given credence of association."
"Sustainable conservation of heritage sites in face of climate change; inclusion of descendant groups in all phases of the archaeological process; responsible curation of large collections"
"Power dynamics and the practice of archaeology - how we address abuses in the field (including sexual harassment, exploitation of students & ERCs, etc.); making meaningful cooperation with local and descendant communities a priority; addressing and improving the appalling lack of diversity in the field; reckoning with the disciplines colonial, racist, and sexist past (and present) and making meaningful changes; revising the SAA structure so that membership concerns and interests are actually seen as important to the organization."
"well-being of project members and consulting communities"
"Allowing indigenous stakeholders to have a voice early on in the development and decision making of projects focused on their ancestors

Making the discipline more aware of sexual harrassment towards women and the LGBT community

Sexual harrassement in field work

Gender disparities broadly

Collaborating with looters/collectors and education thereof

Media- how to do this in an ethical manner and to avoid common pitfalls"
"Obviously, concerns about sexual harassment and assault are huge; we're finally bringing these age-old issues to light. Beyond that, I see equitability as a key concern: ensuring good wages for fieldgoing technicians, being proactive and respectful in our engagement with Native (First Nations, Indigenous, et al) peoples, working towards a broader audience for better public outreach and education, etc."
"Sexual harassment and sexual violence on field schools and other field contexts. Effective collaboration and consultation with Native American and other descendent communities.  Curation crisis--proper curation and accessibility of archived archaeological materials for preservation and research."
"Maintaining stewardship of archaeological resources and communicating fairly with native groups and other interest groups within our communities."
"Cooperation with indigenous peoples
Cultural patrimony
looting
traffic in artifacts
equal treatment of all regardless of gender, race, religion, etc......."
"Finding a balance for the very important need to preserve archaeological sites on private land and the rights of private property owners.  Finding a balance for the very important need to curate in perpetuity artifacts from private property and public property with the challenge of securing long-term funding for facilities that can support scientifically advanced care, treatment, and study of artifacts.

And, not less important, but a different kind of importance that will require a different approach, addressing gender inequalities."
"Sharing data and keeping information private as appropriate like site location or Native American beliefs.
"
NA
"Adherence to good scientific practice. Appropriate dealing with relevant stakeholders. Making results available to public."
"Relations to Indigenous peoples,  sexual harassment"
"1)  The use of private funding and private endowment/patronage to support archaeological research and publication.
2)  Public outreach; including interpretation, importance and utility of the scientific method, and heritage studies, to the public as well as government officials.  
3)  Support for long-term records and artifact curation, including widely accessible digital archives.   
"
"Harassment, indigenous rights, stewardship and curation"
"Consultation with nonprofessionals and clients in the context of CRM projects"
"Minimalization of under-served groups interested in archaeology, especially those who are not working in the archaeological sciences but still have great interest and provide support"
NA
"irrespective of field: harassment/equity issues (gender, class, ethnicity)

archaeology specifically: descendant communities (few archaeologists even now consider this), repatriating collections to home institutions (even when that means chasing down funds to help them build collections facilities), destruction of archaeological heritage & illicit antiquities trafficking. Here I am not talking about writing articles that promote one's own professional career. I'm talking about on-the-ground work with law enforcement and descendant communities and non-profits that does not yield a line in one's resume.

* those are all our responsibilities as professional archaeologists but few people I know think about them and fewer still volunteer time to address these issues: which puts an awful lot of responsibility on a very small number of us
"
"How we work within and with communities.  Relationships need to be reciprocal and decisions should be made by those who live in and near archaeological sites, not outsiders coming in who want to do research for their own personal gain."
"power imbalances and sexual harassment"
"Mistreatment of students and workers in the field."
"Looting and antiquities trade; uneven emphasis on public dissemination of findings; healthy engagement of descendant communities; collections/records management and access"
"Finding new and creative ways for the government and public at large to fund research from which they gain absolutely nothing."
"Safe Workplace & Educational Environments, Stewardship, Accountability, Records & preservation, public reporting & publication"
"Including voices of different groups with standing / vested interest, and negotiating competing interests.  And issues of Discrimination based on sex, gender, and race."
"Sex, Race"
"Working for a federal agency I feel that there has been a tremendous amount of archaeological data produced.  However, I see that all of that data is not well managed.  Millions of reports and studies have been produced but there is no efficient way of accessing that data.  While I think that data should be more available there is an ethical dilemma of breaching archaeological laws and disclosing archaeological site locations to people that want to loot those sites."
"Looting/destruction of archaeological sites and materials; professionalism and respect for all members of our field; clarification on authorship issues."
"Treatment of artifacts. Not engaging in sale
Or valuing of any kind. Adherence to all laws particularly 
In reference to Native American values .  

Treating all individuals with respect and professionalism. 

"
"The long-term care and preservation of artifacts taken from the ground (we should collect, but then we have to maintain)."
"Equality and equity among professional archaeologists; creating field projects that are inclusive of descendant communities; looting and site destruction."
"Integrity of work.
Professional conduct.
"
"Conflicts of interests & conflating of academic goals/interest with those of corportions."
"Lack of commitment to curation and re-use of collections."
"Including diverse voices including those of the people we study."
"Meaningful, equitable partnerships with communities -- especially Indigenous communities."
"-Conservation of resources-when is it useful
-Non-provenienced material--the use thereof, should it never be used under any circumstances or should it depend on the context
-Cooperation with client groups, specifically those those remains are being studied
-Curation-keep pushing the need and pressure states to take responsibility for thier artifact resouces rather than force contractors to do so"
"Making sure local peoples are involved in and on board with archaeological investigations in areas important to them. Making sure data is collected and recorded in a complete and competent matter, and that no data is discarded. Making sure all data is available to anyone who's research it would benefit and to any persons who are interested."
"Finding the right balance between the investigative priorities of archaeologists and the desires of native populations in various parts of the world."
"Federal and state laws being circumvented to conduct and produce substandard archaeological studies."
"Discriminatory and harassing behaviors in all areas of archaeology. They are poisoning the discipline"
"Safety in the field, labs, and classroom. Preservation of the archaeological record."
"Adequate engagement with local populations"
"Harassment, assault, and other abuses of power within both academic and CRM settings.

Relationships with descendent communities.

Treatment of human remains, especially the remains of Indigenous peoples."
"1) Protection of the cultural heritage resources from unauthorized and unethical damage and destruction.

2) Protection of the rights of descendant peoples to have appropriate access to these resources.

3) Protection of the rights of archaeologists to have appropriate access to these resources in accordance with 1) and 2)."
"Native American:archaeologist cooperation.

Private companies going out of business and land-filling collections because they were never properly curated.

Male:Female sexual harassment.

"
"Too many archaeologist either do not know what ethics behavior entails or do not care, putting self-interest first."
"- Addressing concerns of decolonization and cultural heritage in places with a history of European colonization
- Diversifying archaeological perspectives to include those that are not white and/or male and/or middle to upper class
- Addressing and making known instances of harassment and assault in the work place
- Plagiarism
"
"Primary ethical concerns are twofold:

1) Responsible research and curation of the materials of the human past, with due consideration given to the rights of shareholders and descendant communities.

2) The ethnics within higher education itself, including the exploitation and abuse of adjunct faculty and graduate students."
"The behavior towards or treatment of fellow professionals. This could be but isn't necessarily in conducting reviews of performance or documents; or in interpersonal relations."
"Making sure data and collections are stored for the long term."
"gender respect and fairness (including harassment issues); work in communities and with individual informants, work with animal subjects"
"1 ) ACADEMIA
Students who take on graduate studies are not guaranteed professional relationships with mentors and colleagues. 

Academic professors are not vetted for there ability to foster professional mentorships and/or to provide a certain standard of academic guidance and caregiving to the students they have accepted.

Professors/academic staff seemingly have free reign to weed out students who are not \"immediately participatory in\" and/or \"fully adept at\" any necessary departmental politics. Students who are prone to think critically, and independently or students who seek the full boundaries and characteristics of collegial atmosphere may be steered out of academic programs. 
Archaeology/anthropology professional relations are not taught or reviewed in undergraduate studies.

Archaeology/Anthropology graduate studies can be an extreme investment financially, personally and professionally and student debt is at and all time high. These circumstances can disproportionately affect nontraditional students, or those students that are the first in their family to seek a higher education - PhD. or M.A.

2 ) ON CALL ARCHAEOLOGY
I am unfamiliar with the circumstance in most states but in one of the most expensive states to reside \"On Call\" or gig archaeology employment is in many cases the only opportunity for employment in the discipline. Having participated in \"On call\" archaeology for 5 years after gaining my M.A. degree and having worked full time in Archaeology/CRM for 3 years post B.A. and before the M.A., I believe I can offer important insight.
Companies that provide on-call archaeology opportunities take zero responsibility in the unfortunate circumstances and short and long term health and lifestyle effects of this type employment. They offer no increased wages/compensation for this \"on the fly\" and often last minute request for field staff and immediate project/client responsive deployments. Many times field deployments are into extremely harsh and totally unfamiliar work environments for unknown amounts of time and they put stress on personal health and personal/family relationships. Many deployments put personal safety in a whole different category as a result of unfamiliar work and living arrangements. From my observations other on call archaeologists (M.A./B.A) who may be desperate for steady work may chose unsafe work relations mistakenly placed in the category of \"a competitive work environment\" in order to prevail as the higher performing employee.  

Many of the companies providing these opportunities seemingly adopt a \"good doer\" or \"employment proving hero\" type of attitude by saving you from periods of unemployment. In reality they are capitalizing as much as possible as a result of this gig economy and they are perhaps normalizing one of the most unfortunate aspects of this career. In reality many of the supervisors of on call employment have little to know knowledge of the circumstances of this type of employment, as it's possible many have never operated as on call archaeologists. In addition the on call field archaeologist can provide higher quality and better responsive field archaeology then the supervisors can guide or recommend. Or they are providing a work talent that is difficult to find but completely underappreciated and under-compensated for. Supervisors may be much more recent company hires as a result of their client relations or computer/gis skills. Full time employment is thereby gained as result of having clients that you bring in as a new hire and may have nothing to do with quality work or dedicated on call response with a particular company.

 \"On call\" opportunities typically provide no guaranteed compensation for all the pre-deployment correspondence/scheduling, the many work supplies (dig kit/recordation material), the storage for all these supplies including personal PPE during gaps between work, the yearly resume updating, or the necessary timecard and expense processing. Because many clients or companies require receipts for food expense reimbursement there can be zero privacy in personal food purchase and consumption.
On call archaeologists can make no long term planning and or important financial decisions about their lifestyle as a result of unpredictable work opportunity.

These circumstances mandate a closer look at the trajectory of employment in the field of cultural resource management, and whether CRM can be a self respecting and mentally healthy career opportunity and feasible career choice. If this status quo continues more transparency is needed about the characteristics of the lifestyle before students pursue academic studies gearing them in to this direction. Also, companies should be confronted about their part in the exploitative circumstance.

I have recently started a new small business and one of my top priorities is to address this exploitative circumstance. I hope to offer public and community archaeology education outreach and or indigenous archaeology as additions to CRM projects throughout the year and thereby minimize on call employment or seasonal work. If there are grants or other funding opportunities for these diverse employment opportunities and engagements and SAA can help facilitate this please highlight this information in future SAA updates and opportunities. 



"
"The delicate balance between accessibility of research data and materials against national and tribal sovereignty and desires to keep data private both within and beyond the USA."
"Issues surrounding sexual harassment; issues surrounding the quality of archaeological investigations and recommendations in the context of cultural resource management."
"I have several:
1) I find it disconcerting that we still place emphasis on digging when there are so many collections in repositories that are under studied or need reanalysis;
2) We readily accept and run with new technologies at great cost and ignore the problems of curation for the collections we say are irreplaceable.  We could get so much more data from exiting collections;
3) Many academic archeologists do not train their students to do CRM or applied anthropology and archeology and seem to just do book learning;
4) There are too many legacy collections in storage outside of their country of origin and poorly stored.  A good field archeologist does not equal a good caretaker of collections;
5) The dichotomy and ranking between field and lab/collections archaeologists, as well as the \"true\" archeology being field work while caring for the data is considered less than.  We are either stewards of history and prehistory or we are not;
6) The 2019 meeting that placed the potential for being sued above the pain of human beings; and finally
7) The publication of unreadable theoretical articles in American Antiquity instead of sharing data and interpretations and not \"showing off\" big vocabulary.  Theory is nothing if it doesn't stand on data."
NA
"Proper attribution of research results and full citation of previous research on a subject or site. Too much willful ignoring of earlier work to inflate the perceived importance of a project or paper."
"Traditionally, archaeological ethics dealt with how we collected, treated, and analyzed the archaeological record. Today, ethics tend to be focused on personal behavior; how we treat each other and how we are treated in business and academic situations."
"Ethical obligations to archaeological record; (1) too much crappy, non-research oriented, client/profit-oriented proforma compliance.  (2) too much guilt and bleeding heart give any self-identified Native American anything they demand. 

In other words, we archaeologists must be scientific researches first and foremost!  Sadly, that is not the case in CRM, government and academic arenas increasingly more often than not.



"
"-First Nations rights to and claims on the past, repatriation

-equity (both in terms of inter-personal relations within the field/classroom and in our interpretation of the past) re: racism, mysogyny, xenophobia, LGBTQIA

-fieldwork practice and how we interface with government and industry"
"I dont think these change much, although perceptions might:
(1) ensuring fair treatment of everyone involved in a project 
(2) ensuring that all project participants are made to feel emotionally safe and supported in the project environment 
(3) ensuring that there is a safe and supportive system for reporting any and all issues that might arise during the course of a project 
(4) investigating allegations of inappropriate behaviour (of any kind) immediately and fairly, with all involved parties given the chance to present their cases
(5) ensuring that anyone who has demonstrably exhibited unethical behaviour is removed from a project immediately, and issued further disciplinary measures as deemed appropriate"
NA
"Work with constituents - the relatively easy ones today are avocational archaeologists and Native Americans.  The more difficult ones are now collectors and pothunters."
NA
"Gender and race based harassment and violence. Economic class and data/research accessibility."
NA
"Engagement with stakeholders, engagement with students, publication/sharing of information/data"
"Sharing credit for fieldwork and publication; treatment of women."
"It is good and enough. But it is necessary to explain in detail for the students."
"Navigating relationships with descendant communities, rights to digital data/data management, health and safety (including sexual harassment, etc)"
"Harassment of many kinds including sexual, verbal and physical. Increasing:

1. lack of integrity of professionals, 
2. sloppy fieldwork and reporting, 

Also increasingly coarser communication with one another which leads to less collegial interaction and, ultimately has the tendency to increase ethical dilemmas."
"CRM"
"Balancing traditional archaeological needs/methods with those of local communities, including descendant communities, private landowners & artifact collectors, and the general public."
"Exploitation of power dynamics - bullying, sexual harassment, not sharing data"
"Professionalism in the field. We cannot continue to be a field of study predominately composed of white people. The way we treat each other in the field impacts who is and isn't compelled to pursue archaeological research as a career. We need to let go of these attitudes of \"if you can't cut it in the field, get out of the discipline\" or \"what happens in the field stays in the field.\" Neither of these approaches to research should be concerned appropriate. These approaches EXCLUDE certain groups of people from archaeology and hurts our profession."
"Truth

Accountability"
"Indigenous community relations
Gender equity"
"Archaeologists' responsibilities for making archaeological data available to others within a reasonable time
Fulfilling responsibilitie for artifact and data and curation
Balancing archaeologists responsibilities to the science and the dissipline with responsibilities to other constituencies."
"professional conduct in relation to stakeholders, descendant communities and practitioners in the field that are not male"
"Sexual harassment policies, working with indigenous groups, looting, repatriation"
"Sharing data equitably among those involved: researchers, researchers affiliated with a project but not directing such as subcontractors, students, and those interested but not involved.
Field behavior: times have changed.
Professional behavior: personal and data-related. Professors have a duty not to hold up the career of their students because of their own schedule, personal life, laziness. Why should a 2 year MA take 4 years?"
"Chauvinism by western trained archaeologists in interactions with archaeologists and archaeological traditions outside their experience.

The normalization of harassment and predatory behavior that has been a fixture of the field for decades."
"For me personally, I've been trying to negotiate my relationship as an archaeologist and collectors, or those who have been involved in pothunting in the past (prior to federal or state laws prohibiting those activities) who have extensive knowledge of sites and collections. I don't necessarily believe this is the most important ethical concern for the community, but it's one that I simply have to deal with in a way that leverages their knowledge while adhering to SAA ethical standards."
"Loosening of regulatory framework protecting archaeological sites."
"vandalism, looting, and destruction of cultural resources continue to be one of the biggest ethical concerns."
"Working with communities and stakeholders (local, descendant, etc.)"
"I often come across examples from pre-field reviews during CRM projects that appear to represent low-grade work ethics ranging from lackadaisical effort levels and slipshod reporting to outright malfeasance (rarer)"
"exaggerating the significance of resources to make money
failure to complete analysis and reporting of field data, particularly excavation
failure to educate a broader public regarding scientific reality, particularly physical and cultural evolution."
"1) pre-planning and follow through for fieldwork: did you budget properly/do your background research and then did you REPORT WITHIN A REASONABLE TIME FRAME and secure long term care of your collection and docs"
"Sexual harassment and racial/gender discrimination"
"Lack of enforcement"
"Equitable and safe work spaces; looting and sale of archaeological material"
NA
"Indigenous heritage, repatriation, research on human remains and culturally significant objects"
"1. Collaboration with and respect for descendant communities. 
2. Preservation (especially with regards to collections and associated archival documents)
3. Public reporting, publication, and education - while these are two different categories in the Principles of Ethics, I see them are highly intertwined. Our (professional archaeologists) track record at making reporting available to to the public is dismal. As a result, the primary education the public receives about the archaeological past is through click bait media and terrible History Channel shows."
"Collections stewardship, site preservation, sexual and other harassment, etc."
"Working with descendent populations

Addressing the destruction of the archaeological record

Addressing the conflict inherent in CRM archaeology that arises from aiding the destruction of historic places for modern development"
"Sexual harassment and discrimination, looting of archaeological sites"
"Shoddy CRM work, a potential conflict between SAA principle 7 and the desire to address Native American repatriation requests, and in academia, self-interested peer-review."
"1. Responsible stewardship of archaeological sites/materials

2. Recording and preserving archaeological sites, features, and materials

3. Non-commercialization of archaeological materials"
"Excavation, treatment, and display of human remains
Accessibility of data, sites
Lack of diversity in students, faculty, publication
"
"Our duty for publishing our work and making it accessible; the long-term curation of both artifacts and archival materials associated with archaeological projects; and inclusivity and addressing working conditions, esp. in regards to sexual harassment"
"Integrity in Archaeological Site Assessment and Evaluation"
"unscrupulous contract firms/individuals."
"I feel that the primary ethical considerations as an archaeologist are 1) to the maintenance of the archaeological record and 2) to ourselves and other stakeholders. These two considerations have many practical applications: refuting the sale of artifacts, conservative excavation practices, collections policies that ensure the preservation of artifacts, consideration of /interaction with descendant and local communities in archaeological investigations, safe and harassment-free archaeological experiences, and so forth."
"Academic responsibility. Intellectual responsibility."
"CRM- The replacement of best value with cheapest in agency requests for proposals. The increasing acceptance by agencies of burial mining while disregarding other features. The practice of lowballing to win projects rather than providing the best product/ research. 

Academia- the reluctance to work with CRM firms. Sometimes budgets constrain the research potential in a strictly CRM setting whereas if we worked in conjunction, the academic side of our field could take the data recovered by CRM and expand on it to say something more meaningful than simply presence/ absence. 

The proclivity by some archys to not approach what we do as science...
"
"To minimize the formal requirements of professional archaeology."
"Relationships with diverse stakeholders.
Responses to looting and destruction of cultural/heritage resources.
Responses to sexual harassment/assault within the field.
"
"Honest interpretation of Kennewick Man as being Caucasian, and not the PC revisionist falsehood that he was from Japan and looked like an Asian. There was a strain of population in ancient Japan that exists today remotely which was called \"the hairy Ainu\". This is a Caucasoid population. The report broadcast by the SSA deliberately omitted that fact, implying Kennewick Man was an Asian, and not Caucasoid. This would seem to concur with the then White House directive to destroy the site and halt DNA verification that Native Americans tribes of today are unrelated to Kennewick Man, and are not entitled to hide him from examination and research."
"bullying, social and academic"
"Lack of fidelity to scientific methods.
\"Steaing\" information/research data from other professionals without giving due credit.
Disrespect for national rules and regulations in other countries. This includes lack of knowledge of these.
Lack of detailed records of field work.
Lack of adequate field reports and publications.
Inadequate knowledge of previous research, especially that carried out by other, international scholars."
"Promoting a high standards of professional practice including guards against misconduct in research, destruction of the archaeological record, destruction or neglect of archaeological data, as well as efforts to improve the reporting and sharing of the results of archaeological research with professional and public audiences. 

Promoting values that help improve the equity of opportunities in archaeology including efforts to combat harassment in any setting, efforts to improve work conditions for archaeologists including those with disabilities, efforts to increase collaborations and participation of descendant communities and other stakeholders in archaeological research, efforts to help protect the sovereignty of data involving descendant communities, and other values centered on the health, safety, and well-being of people involved in archaeology at any level. 

Promoting the sharing of data and methods so that research can be reproduced and evaluated while also finding ways to protect site locations and other sensitive information when applicable."
"Sexual harassment 
Incorporating American Indian perspectives in research where appropriate
Working with amateurs that may be engaging in looting and or buying and selling of artifacts -- if we don't work with them, how can we influence their behavior for the better; if we do work with them, how is it not tacitly endorsing their behavior?

"
NA
NA
"Our treatment of each other as archaeologists and people; addressing inequalities within the field related to gender, sexuality, ethnicity and other vectors of difference."
"The commercialized nature of CRM work can sometimes be problematic -- deadlines and tight budgets can sometimes translate into less than ideal archaeological work."
"Equity and justice"
"Dealing with Native communities
Dealing with human remains
Working with collections
Fairness in contracting
Approrpiate theoretical and political issues"
"Responsibility toward equitable treatment and documentation of all categories of material culture, human remains, etc., during excavation, analysis, and curation along with consulting community members/stakeholders about their desires/concerns.  Safe environments for all members of field and lab teams, gender equity, and protection from harassment (sexual or nonsexual bullying, coercion, etc.). Publication or availability of collections/data is also imperative."
"harm reduction, with priority given to historically marginalized communities"
NA
"At the federal level, many federal archaeologists are poorly qualified to hold the positions they hold .Bad management results.  In the Rocky Mountain West, there is a current trend of overemphasizing Native American \"consultation\".  Too frequently a \"tribal position\" is taken as gospel, i.e. \"all sites are sacred and you archaeologists (read blue eyes) shouldn't tough them.  Let them be destroyed\".  This violates Section 106 consultation, to the delight of  pro industry land managers and developers. The minority of consulting archaeologists who do bad work, i.e. blow off sites, has diminished but is still a problem.  TPOs come and go, but frequently engage in unethical behavior, due to financial considerations or their lack of adequate training and education. NAGPRA is a totally abused system, NPS, as well as select federal agencies, has sold the farm on NAGPRA,  repatriating back to whomever just to clear the shelves of archaeological materials, not true NAGPRA articles.  This is a very serious and growing problem that SAA should be extremely concerned about."
"Relationships between people and things. Prioritizing people over things and research."
"Collections curation, working with descendant communities, dealing with amateur collections and collectors"
"Curation of collections"
"Power imbalances inherent in fieldwork situations (people are isolated from their normal support systems) create opportunities for predators and unsafe/uneasy situations for students and other vulnerable populations. Outside of the field, these power imbalances work to make it difficult for victims ot report and discuss their experiences without facing social backlash."
"numbered, but not by importance:
(1) the either/or binary between \"development\" and \"heritage\" supporters. 
(2) the lack of formal and informal training in ethics within anthropology programs and higher ed more generally. 
(3) the divide between research, federal/state, and for-profit activities"
"Sexual harrassment/assault"
"I'm not ranking ethical concerns"
"Harassment, community collaboration and engagement"
"Colonial legacies, publishing unprovenanced materials, local engagement, lack of publishing"
"Misuse of positions of authority in treatment of subordinates/trainees/colleagues who are ECRs and gender/ethnicity minorities - including what amounts to Intellectual theft. Sexual harassment/gender discrimination. Issues related to failures to curate records/collections. Issues related to failure to have meaningful collaboration/consultation with descendant communities."
"Preservation OVER excavation
Decolonization of archaeology
Indigenous rights
Fair treatment of all in our field and the communities with which we work/impact
Sexual harassment
Bullying by senior colleagues male AND female"
"Disregarding ethical field practices in CRM 
Field  and crew leaders with no knowledge of ethical practices
Ignoring archaeological sites and finds not testing and not recording sites along a survey
Sexual Harassment
Alcohol Drugs party atmosphere
Lack of knowledge and sharing MOA with crew leads  to unethical practices breaking the MOA with Indigenous communities."
"Harassment and bullying, and failure to protect vulnerable individuals from harassment and bullying."
"High ethical standards for the CRM industry"
"CRM practitioners that cut corners to satisfy clients."
"Timely reporting of research results"
"Gender inequallity"
"Our (still extractive) relationship with indigenous peoples and the sexual harassment crisis."
"As a Native American citizen, it can be challenging seeing the way certain protocols are or arent followed and how our ancestors are discussed."
"Proper fieldwork"
"Collections and data access issues, Native American relationships"
"Lack of consultation with descendant or other relevant communities as part of the archaeological research process. No IRB-like review of potential archaeological projects."
"Power dynamics in the field and lab, equitable access for everyone for training, working with indigenous peoples."
"Sexual harassment is a big one, of course. Misuse of archaeological artifacts (selling, etc.). Issues with excavation (OSHA guidelines not being followed, big cases like Rassawek)."
"sexual harassment; repatriation; artifact return"
"We need clarification of how our responsibility to the resource meshes with responsibilities to employers/clients. More importantly, we need a discussion on our responsibility to descendant communities. Not just the public or other archeologists."
"Treatment of non-cis white male individuals; ensuring that the voices of non-binary, PoC, LGBTQIA+ individuals are heard and not squelched; ensuring that sexual harassment of ANY KIND does not exist in the field or off of it (as someone who personally experienced massive misogyny and another student staring at multiple chests of women through the field program, I was disgusted); ensuring that these voices are also allowed to give input in management of data processing/lab work; that the data collected do not remain unpublished, that the data collected do not fall subject to object fetishization and other parts of the data become disregarded"
"In no priority order but all are important: 

1) The need for archaeologists to publish their field investigations in a timely manner, i.e. within 12-16 months. Too many archaeologists have never published their field work, even after decades. They are no better than looters. 
2) The NECESSITY for EVERY archaeologist to work with collectors.
3)  The NECESSITY for EVERY archaeologist to work with and engage constituent and/or descendant communities and other publics. 
4) There is still way too much sexual and racial discrimination against women and minorities and sexual abuse against men and women, especially in university and field settings."
"Archaeology as a perpetuation of colonialism
Sexual harassment in and out of field work
Balancing open access data with sensitive stockholder data
Our carbon footprint

"
"1. Harassment, bullying, and other non-professional treatment of fellow archaeologists and students.
2. Related an emphasis of objects over people both in general archaeological study and practice, and in the response of the Board to sexual harassment and bullying.
3. An increasing graying of professional ethics related to private artifact collection and publication."
"Stealing other peoples research without giving them credit.Another serious ethical issue, particularly if you're working in Latin America is having a project stolen right out from under you. This has happened to me several time, twice in Ecuador and once in Peru. In the former, I had in one case a Fulbright Research Grant and NSF funding, in the other case in Ecuador I had Fulbright research grant funding and the site was stolen by an Ecuadorian archaeologist and then later destroyed by Mormons who had infiltrated this village in the Guayax Basin. The site was San Lorenzo del Mate. It was a late Valdivia site with some of the earliest ceramic bottles in the Andes. The SAA condemned the female archaeologist who stole the Inca palace complex Inahuasi de Caranqui out from under me. But then she went back to the site the next two field seasons and did more excavations with the help of this Ecuadorian, Jose Echeverria. She also has several publications with Echeverria on the site in Ecuadorian journals. The SAA never said anything despite the fact that NGS was interviewing me for a television show on my research since the site was the northernmost palace complex of Huayna Capac and birthplace of his son Atahualpa the last Inca emperor."
"-sexual harassment and assault
-intellectual property
-treatment of Natives and native remains
-looting"
"Exclusivity of all who identify as belonging in the profession, participation possible for all of these, including cost of attendance and safe spaces at conferences and membership. SAA is far away from that."
NA
"ensuring the archaeological research is socially relevant to contemporary concerns and responsible to stakeholder voices."
"Sexual Harassment
Gender equity
Income Equity
Lack of diversity"
"Looting and artifact collection by ARCHAEOLOGISTS. The number of archaeologists who collect is way to high.
Open Access - lack of it.
Open Sourcing - lack of it.
Open Data - lack of it.
Discrimination - gender, ethnic, class
The very concepts that underline CRM - no one wants to ask the question is what we do ethical. Is preservation by recording ethical? 
Academia - the power structures are so perverse

If I had to choose one overarching theme then the confusion between what is ethical and what is lawful - so many people don't realize what is legal is not always what is ethical."
"Reporting archaeological knowledge and site forms to the State Historic Preservation Office on both private and public lands."
"Sexual Assault/Sexual Harassment, working with/respecting descendant communities"
"Stewardship and ethical collaboration"
"Appropriate engagement with local communities where they are closely aligned with the site, e.g. indigenous groups.
Balancing disciplinary priorities with the need to procure funding for research, conservation and presentation.
Management of unprovenanced artifacts, both in museums and in private collections, and trade in looted material.
Adapting curricula so that students are being prepared for jobs that actually will exist in the future."
NA
"1. Harassment of members during field, lab, or other work envt.
2. Unprofessional conduct in appropriating others work, attempting to preventi publication of data by students, former students, or colleagues.
3. Ethical conduct with descendant populations and/or landowners."
"Archeologists intentionally not recording important finds to keep their clients happy, so that construction may proceed."
"Conveying ethical principles to archaeology volunteers and through public education; 

Practicing professional scientific work to the highest standards, while also working with Native American and other descendant groups and respecting their values;

Protecting archaeological resources which are increasingly threatened by ready information on the internet; and

Ensuring work and research environments where sexual, racial, or other types of harassment are not tolerated.  

Public education should also emphasize the principles of ethics.  As the chairperson of a volunteer group associated with the protection of one of our national monuments, I've incorporated the ethical principles into our strategic plan."
"Sexual assault and harassment in the field
Lack of appropriate consultation with descendent communities, especially Native folks
Gender discrimination in hiring and practice
Racism"
"Destruction of archaeological sites due to development, vandalism, and climate change (e.g., sea level rise)."
"Harassment free fieldwork/workplaces
Proper curation of excavated material at repositories (and associated accessibility) 
Engaging avocational groups (and, frankly, looters) 
Public visitation to archaeological landscapes"
"Appropriate and meaningful consultation with indigenous communities
Appropriate compensation for field personnel
Equal opportunity for women and minorities throughout the profession
Compensation and more permanent employment for adjunct faculty
Level of quality on CRM reports
Responsible curation and repatriation
Completing write-up of research projects
Access to archives from faculty and researchers outside of a host organization"
"Sexual misconduct and sharing and respecting knowledge of the past with the communities with which we work."
"That we will not apply our lofty ethics at the ground level; we do not hold our peers or colleagues accountable so our ethics are useless."
"creating a work and learning environment free of sexual and other harassment

guidelines around destructive sampling should be established

the need for open and reproducible science"
"1. Decolonization
2. Stop supporting sexual harassment"
"Sexual harassment, especially in fieldwork settings; exclusionary disciplinary norms, especially in relation to gender, class, and disability."
"Relationships with Native American groups
Relationships with collectors
Looting and destruction of cultural heritage
Public education and data sharing
Proper excavation and analysis methodology
Curation crisis
"
"I think that there need to be better ethical guidelines with regard to (1) the capture, use, and long-term curation of digital data as well as (2) an additional ethical principle that more effectively confronts and guides the control, use, and display of indigenous human remains and sacred objects, globally, for museums, curation facilities, and government agencies."
"Working with Indigenous populations
Working with artifact collectors
Preserving the past through CRM"
"Social media and unethical attitudes of professionals"
"Advocacy for community heritage (especially indigenous communities); respect for local communities, public outreach and making our findings relevant (especially regarding implementation of public policy that effects heritage); inclusivity in all aspects of archaeological research; thinking about sustainable futures of the profession"
"sexual harassment and gender equity
working with descendant and stakeholder communities
ethical research with human remains (but that does not mean no research)
antiquities trade
public relevance of archaeology"
"Sexual harassment, economic equality, engagement with descendant groups, looting"
"Lack of representation and racial discrimination, sexual harassment and assault, gender discrimination, improving but still lacking engagement with indigenous communities, and bullying and harassment by mentors toward students at all levels"
"Physical and emotional safety of those involved. More collaboration with descendant communities. More efforts to decolonize the field."
"Lack of descendent communities represented at all stages of Archaeological research, from students to authorship to appropriate involvement during the research and interpretation."
NA
"Destruction of sites/artifacts by private property owners or citizens due to the fact that its their land and they can do what they want with it essentially, the lack of knowledge and respect the public in the USA has for Indigenous artifacts and communities in general. Especially sites where archaeologists dont have access"
"I am biased, but I believe that the loss of information and failure to share information and data is a major ethical concern.  As we physically destroy archaeological sites as a result of excavations, the broader community fails to realize that we are destroying the information and data by not adequately archiving and preserving this information."
"Sexual discrimination/harassment/assault in the industry and school. Interacting with private collectors/the public"
"1- RACE- the use of the word incorrectly and the resurgence of racial based \"science\". 2- lack of diversity in science, racism. 3- mishandling of human remains, misunderstanding of NAGPRA & lack of concern for modern Native peoples perspectives and consent. 4- Lack of training in terms of what TO DO. We talk a lot about what not to do, but there is little training on how to properly engage with descendant communities etc. in the classroom. 5- sexism and sexual misconduct 6- broken academic system and the way it affects grad students and junior faculty."
"Many CRM archaeologists continue to low bid curation costs, and are woefully undertrained to prepare collections and field records for longterm preservation. Additionally, the do not encourage private property owners to donate the systematic collections to museums and/or tribal repositories. Part of their reasoning is that the CRM firm doesn't want to prepare the collections and archives to appropriate standards. This is ethically irresponsible, but it is not spelled out adequately in the SAA policy."
"I think the principles cover the breadth/concerns well -- I can't think that any one is more important than the others."
"Sexual harassment/assault and creating safe environments for everyone, responsibilities to indigenous and descent communities beyond just checking the consultation box, sharing knowledge in an inclusive way"
"Gender discrimination, issues with sexual harassment and sexual assault, dismissing the concerns of Native American and K?naka Maoli (Native Hawaiian) descendant communities, destructive CRM projects."
"Ethics of personal respect for others

Lack of training in ethics

Poor quality work that goes undiscovered or that cannot be proven

Theft from public lands

Lack of expertise at local levels where the rubber hits the road"
"Lack of sensitivity about human remains; sexism and chauvinism; antipathy to working with indigenous communities; capitalism and the US CRM industry"
NA
"Sexual harrassment/assault and the handling of such cases, Indigenous collaboration and participation, and looting"
"continue to protect archaeological resources, working with indigenous communities, preventing harassment in the field, lab, and classroom"
NA
NA
"Persecution of people who find archeological stuff and don't immediately give it to the government, to the extent that they can even go to jail for that. It violates their private property rights and some people might not even know that they must give stuff to the government.

Also archeological artifacts that have been stolen from indigenous people, especially in Britain. They should probably return those."
"SAA board members and staff putting their own interests above the safety and well being of the membership at large."
NA
"The ethical treatment of archaeological remains from more than just a single academic viewpoint."
"Sexual harassment, sexismt, racism, bigotry. Should I go on?"
"Sexual harassment, sexual discrimination, intellectual property, commodification of archaeological materials"
"There are many. Looting and illegal sales of artifacts continue and the public seems to be more drawn to pseudoarchaeology than archaeology itself. However, the biggest ethical concerns, for me, remain the ethics of non-Indigenous archaeologists (which make up the VAST majority of the SAA membership) being the stewards of and experts on Indigenous histories. Alongside this is the way archaeology is practiced where already marginalized communities (BIPOC, LBGTQ2S+, persons with disabilities, etc.) do not feel welcome or supported."
"relationship with indigenous communities
power differential in field schools & on field projects"
"1)  The actual use of appropriate survey techniques by consultant staff in the field.

2)  Failure to extrapolate significant observations and conclusions from data."
"I think sexual harassment is a huge ethical concern, along with standards for fieldwork and working with amateurs."
"Human skeletal remain repatriation, preservation of cultural, natural, ecological heritage, conservation of collections, dissemination of knowledge of shared natural history"
"Ethical concerns unfortunately abound in archaeology today. A central concern are projects that do not consult and collaborate with Native American descendant communities and other stakeholders. A second but equally operative concern is discrimination and sexual misconduct. There need to be more provisions in place to ensure that sexual misconduct is not tolerated by the society and that a commitment to diversity by the society is essential as we move forward into the 21st century."
"Care of people - making the field a safe place for its participants"
"Recognizing the importance of including indigenous community perspectives and related legal and operational policies."
NA
"Ownership and dissemination of information generated by archaeologists. Democratization of knowledge
What constitutes collaboration or community-generated research? These terms get used a lot. Who is actually doing it?
Archaeology and development (what are the issues that CRM archaeologists are confronted with)"
"I think it comes from outside the archaeological community - from political decisions being made without regard to archaeological resources."
"There are many ethical concerns in the field, and the current SAA Principles cover many of them. But there are several areas where the current principles do not go far enough. Principle Number 9, for instance, says that archaeologists are responsible to know the laws and policies of their home nations and institutional workplaces, and to abide by them. But this implies a narrow legalistic approach that does not respond adequately to the range of behaviors that can create hostile or just unpleasant work environments for many (especially junior) archaeologists.  Avoiding any sort of harassment, bullying, or discrimination against coworkers, subordinates, or colleagues should be a principle of archaeological ethics, regardless of any particular nation's or institution's policies. This principle is especially important in archaeology, where field research often creates social situations where it can seem that normal rules of social interaction do not apply (though problems can arise in any academic or work setting, not just in the field). Supervisors and organizations have a responsibility to not just avoid harassing or bullying subordinates, but have an ethical responsibility to deliberately create an environment where such behavior is not tolerated and all participants can participate safely. 

The non-harassment, non-bullying ethical principle should also extend to peer reviews. Critical reviews are sometimes warranted, but using the cover of anonymity to attack and insult authors or unfairly characterize their work (or to unreasonably promote the reviewer's work) is both common and deeply unethical. It should be explicitly covered in the SAA Principles, and SAA should ensure that reviewers for the society's journals do not engage in such abuse.

I also would argue that depite the current Principles 6 and 7 (concerning reporting and data sharing), there are ethical concerns surrounding data availability and replicability of analyses. SAA should push for open science policies for archaeological data, to the greatest extent possible. There are, of course, issues with site location data, but whenever articles are published, data (and code related to analysis) should be made available. SAA could and should do much more to promote this kind of data sharing (by requiring a data sharing statement with every article published in the society's journals, for instance).

"
NA
"Relationship with communities who claim descent from the people archaeologists study -- most often Native Americans and other Indigenous peoples."
"1. As we take a position that recognizes that science is influenced by the social context in which it is practiced, we need to be concerned about the ethics of practice relative to our workplaces, our work with descendent communities, and our work with surrounding communities, and our colleagues. Many 'subparts' to this could be created. 
2. The ethics of open data and open science (which is not to say all \"open is good\" but how to move that direction ethically.  
"
"lowballing competitive bids by cutting corners on contract research"
"gender equality, information dissemination, pirating others' work"
"Archaeologists who do not publish their results in a timely manner. 
Collections that are not properly curated. 
"
"I believe preservation and mitigation of historical resources should be the main focus, especially with climate change and rising sea levels.  I also believe it is important to make sure people are not looting and profiting from selling artifacts."
"Ethical concerns over 
1) the study of human remains
2) towards our students/postdocs/other scholars regarding harassment and bullying
3) of the SAA towards its members - specifically in protecting them from bullies/harassers
4) of the SAA towards all students in archaeology
5) of the SAA to protect students - especially those that are BIPOC
"
"Preservation and full publication of digital data.
Ensuring open access to publications resulting from research.
Responsible collaboration with colleagues overseas.
Gender equality."
"How we address concerns of marginalized or otherwise impacted groups within the field (e.g. Indigenous representation, or the Yesner incident in Albuquerque), and how we reconcile site/resource protection with open research principles."
"Antiquities-trade related issues (as they involve all kinds of other illicit criminal networks, and as an archaeologist, I don't want any monetary value assigned to archaeological objects). I.e., we shouldn't publish, purchase, or accept illicitly excavated artifacts, or in any way encourage the looting of archaeological sites.

I understand it is hard to publish in a timely fashion (I am certainly an offender, as I think most of us are), but at some point a scholar should cede partial or total control of a project/assemblage, and not hoard data.

There are also the general concerns that are not specific to archaeology...treatment of students, sexism, racism, etc.; as they are not limited to archaeology, with the possible exception of treatment of students and colleagues on excavations or treatment of host and/or descendent communities, I can't really rank them. With regard to treatment of any of these categories of people...to say we should treat everyone with respect: is that an ethical issue? a practical issue (you get better results when you treat people with respect)?"
NA
"1. pressure to determine identified cultural resources to not be sites, to determine identified cultural resources not be eligible for NRHP, not to record resources at all or to record them so cursorily or incorrectly that efforts to manage the resources are meaningless
2. what to do with all the collections (properly curated and not)"
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
"1. tensions between our perceived obligations to stakeholders and our perceived obligations to the field itself
2. increasing presumption that the purpose of archaeology is to address issues in the present rather than understanding issues, trajectories and processes in the past.
3. Finding resolutions to the problems of a contested past, where what one can say about real, lived lives is constrained or shaped by how living people today may feel about those statements
4. Loss of avenues to the past through natural and man-made causes
5. General theoretical paralysis of the discipline
"
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
"Sexual Harassment and Assault
Gender bias
Looting
PIs not publishing their data in less than two decades."
"Field and office crew safety, ethics of collector-archaeologist collaboration, burials and navigating successful relationships with descendant communities"
NA
NA
NA
"Guidelines to resolve conflicts between colleagues, public, and SAA.  Vagaries contribute to problems.

"
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
"Within the framework of the existing SAA ethical principles, the topic that I engage with more than the others is probably in relationship to relationships between private landowners and archaeologists wishing to conduct non-CRM research on their property, particularly relating to issues of long-term ownership and curation of collections, and particularly the extent to which formal, written agreements may intimidate landowners, or in their absence, the degree of reliability in simple verbal agreements long-term.

Another area is regarding the submission of data and reports from CRM firms whose contracted fieldwork may have been ended due to a lack of funding or a change in development plans, and whether or not such work can be considered contractually owned by the individual/corporation that originally paid for the work, and whether archaeologists have sufficient legal basis to ensure that even cancelled project reports and/or data must be filed with at least their respective state archaeological site files office.  In other words, can a contracted report and data be held back from any public view even after the work has been completed (and those affected parts of any site already destroyed by excavation)."
"Since my professional involvement with archeology is now based on a career as a federal archeologist heavily involved in the teaching and implementation of ARPA and NAGPRA, my concern is where archeologists have seen fit to find commercial opportunities as Subject Matter Experts for the defense in criminal cases taking place on federal and Indian lands. We have seen the impact of section 106 of NHPA as a commercial enterprise, and I acknowledge that the federal government was and is unprepared to meet the ongoing challenge of 106 without private sector assistance. But I fear that ARPA and NAGPRA will become a \"cash cow\" for some archeologists. While I support fully our legal system's due process, those cases in which I have been involved showed a lack of concern on the part of archeologists working for the defense for substantive efforts in their side of case management. In other words, it looks to me like they are just out for the money. Attacking in court a Damage Assessment document prepared by a federal or Indian archeologist is, I suppose, fair game, but the notion that archeologists may find a source of income from this troubles me greatly and I firmly believe that it falls into the category of \"unethical.\""
"Social responsibility"
NA
NA
NA
"The entire issue of museum ownership of artifacts from developing nations. I support western museums holding on to traditional collections. I have visited museums all over the world and many developing nations do not have the material resources to support security, research and curatorial integrity."
"1) Serving the goal that there is an underlying public interest in the cultural history of peoples (the basis for most historic preservation law and regulation).
2) Serving the descendant community need, expressed on occasion, to assert cultural privacy over historical information and cultural content.
3) Honoring the legal and cultural values, in the United States, that privilege private property rights over public rights.
4) Developing and implementing triage criteria in the preservation, recovery, analysis, and interpretation of cultural resources information in the face of cultural resources destruction by development."
NA
NA
"To direct ethically the archeological work."
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
"Sexual harassment and violence
"
"Time/money vs. adequate review, reporting, and fieldwork
Inadequate tribal consultation"
"Inclusiveness and intersectionality (re gender parity and minority representation), use of traditional knowledge, harassment and intimidation."
NA
"Folks who are out for the buck over and above doing goof archaeology, and industry that pushes them to do so."
"Ownership of archaeological specimens and who is the invested caretaker of the cultural record"
"We have a duty, and I think an ethical obligation to use materials in curation for the purposes that they were intended rather than let them languish in storage facilities."
NA
"Sexual harassment and equality among our diverse members. 
Additionally, some prevalent unprofessional behaviors (the drinking, for example) contribute to the issues of sexual harassment and inappropriate behavior."
"Inclusion of source communities
Collection and management of artifacts
Cultural resource management compliance with laws and policies"
"Overpublication: people writing the same basic article over and over and having it appear in multiple venues.

Gender bias, which is still a considerable problem. I hear things about female students and faculty all the time that sound like something from the 1950s. Hiring bias is still a problem. Bias in grant proposals and reviews still exists. Many times in grant meetings I hear that the proposal needs to be sent to \"Bill, Ted, Fred, and Joe\" for review. And I say: \"Mary, Jane, Sue, and Anne would also be excellent reviewers.\" And people say, \"Oh, yes, them too.\" Females, even highly accomplished ones, are often an afterthought.

Lack of mentorship for graduate students and poor preparation for a variety of careers. Too many faculty see that the only \"real\" job is a tenure-track one, and even *years* after their former students have become successful in a variety of careers the faculty mentor will let out a deep sigh about how it was \"too bad\" that so-and-so \"never got a job\" as if the only worthwhile job is in an R1 (full disclosure: I teach in an R1, and often find myself to be the only faculty member who is willing to proactively talk to grad students about job variety). 

"
"Harassment and bullying in the arch community
Public and governmental outreach about what we do and why it is vital
Working with descendent communities 
Inclusiveness
Rights (Or lack there of) of workers, and the disposable nature by which field techs are treated"
"Integrity of archeologists."
NA
"Sexual harassment and the lack of true institutional efforts to deal with it. The looting of archaeological sites, and the ineptitude of ROPA to deal with members accused of and known to have committed ethical violations."
"Blatant disregard for tribal wishes during excavation. I witnessed this firsthand on my first big project for a well known firm. The tribal liaison come out to speak to the entire crew about the tribe's wishes for excavation if we found skeletal remains - no photographs, dig only with tools made of natural materials (metal, wood), metal pails only to collect back dirt for screening - basically, no plastic allowed. As soon as the liaison drove away, the crew chief said \"forget all that.\" We were instructed to take photographs of all burials and limits were not placed on our tools."
"Support of colleagues in the publication of new scholarshop.

Research design that includes but does not prioritize stakeholder voices and viewpoints.

Politicalization of investigations and finds needs to be dealt with..discussed using scientific, nterpretative and humanistoc viewpoints

Proper training with standards of academic archaeology students: which would include cultural m.j aterial as nd plas ces awareness, conservation, excavation, community engagement and scientific reporting of findings.

Representation before governmental, academic and industriaL audiences."
"Threats to cultural resources from development and hostile political ideologies"
NA
NA
NA
NA
"Production/rescue archaeology.  By their nature they trim investigations and apply profit motives to the discipline."
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
"Lack of consultation with ancestral groups in Section 106; use of unqualified staff as a cost saving measure in contract archaeology"
NA
NA
NA
"Too  many archaeologists sacrificing archaeological values to placate their government/private employers for fear of getting fired and losing future jobs.."
"Quality of ethical fieldwork over receiving money to fake results"
"Are people qualified, and are they treating their crew fairly."
NA
"Prevention of looting; working to develop ethical public/private enterprise relationships; encouraging greater community development."
"may be related to minority country???"
"-sexual harassment and gender representation
-stronger principles regarding publishing research involving unprovenanced/unprovenienced artifacts, human remains, etc. 
-fair wages and unionization for commercial archaeology"
NA
"Insecurities of professional staff placing their egos in front of what is best for the resource and/or constituent communities."
"Unlike in many other countries, property rights in the US prevent federal and/or state laws from adequately protecting archaeological resources. As a consequence, we must be especially diligent in promoting such protection as an ethical imperative for professionals, avocationals, and the public at large. Many collectors still have a finders keepers attitude toward resources found on either public or private lands. This is an ethical issue that SAA members could and should run with. We need to lead the way in changing attitudes and behaviors beyond the boundaries of our profession. I am much less concerned about the ethical behavior of SAA memebers."
NA
"Sexual harassment and discrimination, falsification of qualifications (lying on a resume), plagiarism, negligence/abandonment/inadequate planning for care of collections, no reporting/publication on excavations"
"Our great ethical threat are two prong. First are unqualified citizens claiming to be archaeologists who present and self publish research that is sensational and utterly false. Second same archaeologists working with pseudo Indian tribes to gain credibility for both suspect groups."
"Openness of data and methods
Community engagement and democratization of archaeological knowledge
Harassment and sexual misconduct
Illicit trade and fraudulent archaeology"
"CRM firms that act for the benefit of companies not the public 
Connecting indigenous people to their past in real ways 
Racism and sexism in academia"
NA
NA
NA
NA
"Are women and students in a safe and moral environment where they are taught in a manner they are comfortable with, with no fear of being harassed or assaulted. 

Are we teaching young students about archaeology and history in an ethical way 

Are we dedicating enough time and resources towards education 

Is enough time and effort being spent dealing with issues like repatriation, and are we talking about it enough 

Are we doing enough to educate the public about archaeology and archaeological sites in America? 
"
"none"
NA
NA
"looting/sale of antiquities
professionalism of practitioners
public education 
stewardship"
"-Working/consulting with Native Americans and descendant communities; 
-intellectual property rights; 
-stewardship, especially curation of and providing access to archaeological collections, including associated records that are hard copy and digital (note that the objects are just as important as the associated records since the latter, especially  digital records and data, are being privileged in many publications); 
-publishing results of archaeological investigations in a timely way; 
-use of non-invasive technologies, like drones and magnetometers; 
-protecting archaeological sites from looting and archaeological collections from theft and loss from neglect;  
-training, especially in the responsibilities archaeologists have for the collections they recover, including financial support for the repository that curates the collection; 
-accountability to the public
-sexual harassment
-partnerships that equally benefit all parties involved
-working with collectors"
NA
"There is not one.  Development of professional standards for Curation of electronic records in perpetuity.  Treatment of women and minority groups especially in field and professional situations. Appropriately balancing professional voice with descendant voice. Teaching ethics."
"Generating more artifacts than we have the resources/willlingness to curate

"
"sexual/gender discrimination/harassment
CRM business ethics and sponsor conflicts of interest"
NA
"Collaboration with descendant communities
Me Too Movement
All archaeology as Public Archaeology"
NA
"Appropriate engagement with descendant communities."
NA
"Push for deregulation and the effect on requirements."
"For compliance work, lack of support from SHPO particularly is a recommendation of more work is provided to a client. Produces a feeling of uncertainty on how to address a resource when client can say SHPO disagrees with you.."
"Harassment and bullying.
Adjunct teaching - employment conditions.
Conservation/land and legal protections.
Open access to data and publications.
Artifact trade/looting/ site destruction."
NA
NA
NA
NA
"1) Codes of conduct in working with descendant Indigenous communities. This needs attention and improvement.
2) Advocacy and support for job security in academia. Too many PhDs, too few jobs. Adjunctification. What is the society doing to address this?
"
"- Parachute Anthropology
- Data hoarding without publication
- Lack of reproducibility of analyses because code and data are shared insufficiently"
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
"Stewardship and public engagement"
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
"Sexism, sexual harassment/assault, discrimination, stealing data, unethical publication and research and processes."
NA
NA
NA
"in my state, the definition of professional supervision of avocationals and guidelines for metal detecting"
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
"Valuing of indigenous peoples' knowledge"
"sexual harrassment
intellectual property
accessibility
local communities"
NA
"Public access to archaeology survey and study results
Public recognition of importance of archaeology"
"Discrimination of various sorts (racial, gender, etc), lack of basic civil discourse, concerns with staff treatment and work policies at private firms, Tribal relationships"
"At this point, gender-related issues, sexual harassment, etc. are critical, as witnessed by the SAA's completely inept handling of them for a long while. I'm glad to see this is changing, at least in terms of a PR perspective, but it's a bit little too late in many ways."
NA
NA
NA
"Redress of the sexual harassment problem within the discipline at large and how the professional organization handles incidents.
Addressing the curation crisis.
Increasing diversity within the field at all levels.
Disincentivizing researchers from continuing to practice colonial forms of knowledge production when working in the global South."
NA
"I see the primary ethical concern is professional/avocational interaction."
"Supporting survivors, minorities, and those who have been systemically victimized by the SAA and the archaeological elite"
"There are ethics involved in the practice of archaeological research. These concerns include proper treatment of cultural resources, consulting with stakeholders and governmental entities, and documenting research appropriately. I also see ethical principles in the way that people participating in archaeological research are treated. As an archaeologist, I have a responsibility to make sure that my coworkers, staff, and students are provided a safe work environment, which includes occupational health and an environment that protects people from sexual harassment, violence, and other harm."
"All of the issues addressed in the SAA's current code are still of great concern today. Most of these issues address archaeologists' responsibilities to other archaeologists, students, and the archaeological record. Unfortunately, the current code does not adequately address ethical issues and archaeologists' responsibilities in dealing with the public, in particular Native Americans, descendant groups, and others concerned with the archaeological record."
"Our relationship with indigenous communities, inclusion, equity, and diversity, and sexual assault and harassment in our field"
NA
"Local communities, indigenous peoples, the role of archaeology in the present, community-driven conservation of heritage closely linked to environmental conservation, nationalism in archaeology"
NA
"#MeToo, safety of workers in this pandemic, exploitative working conditions for students and low-wage arch techs, too little discussion of NAGPRA, not enough public advocacy against looting"
NA
"Sexual harassment"
"I see two, which are not mutually exclusive
1) How we engage with the communities who heritage we work with,
2) How we engage with each other (archaeologists engaging with other archaeologists)"
NA
"Sexual harassment/assault, equality in pay and treatment, archaeology's responsibility to the general public"
"Shift towards honoring religion-specific narratives/preferences over the public good"
"Human remains recovery and analysis, repatriation of antiquities to their places of origin, reporting standards and timelines"
"We need ethical guidelines that place greater emphasis on the responsibility of archaeologists to living people and collaborative research. The current SAA code of ethics places too much emphasis on the archaeologist as the steward of the archaeological record. This is problematic because NAGPRA has established that we, as archaeologists, must share our stewardship responsibility with a diversity of stakeholders. A greater emphasis on living people also refers to issues of harassment in the workplace and the field. We are supposed to maintain professional relationship with our colleagues but I wonder if the SAA code of ethics should contain stronger language on gender-based, race-based and other forms of harassment."
NA
NA
"Control of collections by unscrupulous archaeologists, issues with poor instruction and bad ethical teaching of students, and political climate of sites/artifacts/land disputes becoming a norm."
"I think I have two: working with Indigenous groups on reconstructing their past in a socially conscious manner, and ensuring that no one, regardless of gender, background, etc., Feels unsafe in our discipline."
NA
"Relating factual field results and accurate interpretation of those findings."
"I am concerned by some practices that are going on in my state where the Office of the State Archaeologist has a clear conflict of interest in many of its practices, including its contracting program, which directly competes with private firms in spite of its management and regulatory functions as a state agency.  Recently, the OSA has begun outsourcing site file management to a private company headed by the State Archaeologist himself."
NA
NA
NA
NA
"I believe the ethics of archaeologists will increasingly be challenged by individuals and corporations during attempts to secure funding or permission for their projects."
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
"Integrity of people performing the work."
NA
"Repatriation and relationships with descendant communities 

Sexual harassment in the workplace

Racism"
"Bullying, exclusive academic environments, implicit biases, gender bias, not utilizing existing collections and yet continuing to dig."
NA
"Sexual harrassment in field and lab settings
Native American consultation/NAGPRA issues
Relationships with amateurs/collectors"
NA
"Accountability to descendant communities, especially but not only Indigenous communities
Professional conduct issues, especially sexual and other forms of harassment
Publication ethics"
NA
"distortion of ethics to meet political/ideological agendas"
"Consultation with all stakeholders.

Thorough recording.

Minimal intervention.

Proper referencing and acknowledgement of work used.

Non-discrimination on base of physical make-up, religion, etc."
"lack of publication and dissemination of research"
NA
NA
"Gender inequality
Sexual Harassment 
Safe work and field environments
accountability
"
"Diversity, inclusion and sexual harassment"
NA
"Looting, Reporting, and the practice , interpretation, and representation of archaeology on largely native sites in North America by and to largely non-native peoples."
NA
NA
NA
"Ownership of the past issues, ethical hiring practices and ethical employment practices,"
"Sexual assault and sexual harassment are big issues in the field - both literally in the field, and at conferences, in the classroom, and in our offices.  Other ethical issues of great concern right now are how US bioarchaeologists are talking about and working with NAGPRA - some are doing a really great job, while others are really not.  There is also currently no way to professionally censure an archaeologist for any ethical misdoings, allowing those archaeologists to continue to be unethical and work in new places and with new people, often without employers or colleagues any the wiser."
"Sexual harassment"
"conducting lax CRM reviews just to get a project finished"
"Sexual harassment and assault in the field and the often concomitant issues surrounding substance abuse (especially alcohol), as well as working with descendant communities."
"CRM firm not allowing archaeological PIs or archaeologists to run a project properly. They want to put Project Managers in charge that have no training or experience in archaeology in charge of projects. Owners are only worried about the bottom line, not the resource.  The hiring of unqualified field personnel by Project Managers not giving senior archaeologists a say in who is hired for the projects. The firm that is venturing from environmental to cultural believes that archaeology is in the way. Firms believe that their jobs are to save clients money not to get the client through the regulatory system properly. Firms believe that any biologist can conduct an archaeological investigation under little supervision. These firms also have no idea what it takes to conduct proper conservation of archaeological artifacts."
"Safe spaces from harassment, stewardship and outreach/being more transparent"
"Sexual harassment/inappropriate conduct, lack of effort/funding/attention directed toward proper collection management/curation, dismissal of historical archaeological resources in compliance/contract archaeological settings, underreporting of/lack of communication of findings from archaeological work conducted in academic settings, overreliance on survey methodologies that ignore wide range of site types when modeling archaeological potential"
"Unreported harassment; gender bias"
"Employers stealing overtime and inappropriate use of per diem."
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
"Looting, and colonialism in dealing with TH material culture"
"Looting and illegal trade and site destruction."
"Not immediately contacting families and tribal groups for help in identifying remains and grave goos

Assuming there are no tribal ancestors without consulting with the knowledgeable NAGPRA officers in every state"
"Commercial archaeologists placing profit over good work. Sexual harassment. Universities not treating contract teaching staff ethically"
NA
"Archaeologys colonial legacy"
"Sustainability of locally embedded archaeological practice in the academy. Just as CRM archaeologists are criticized for 'parachuting' into places they have not lived and do not sustain relationships in, so too are academic archaeologists often disconnected from the physical communities they live in."
"SEXUAL HARASSMENT, GENDER DISCRIMINATION, BULLYING"
NA
NA
"- workplace harrassment (of any kind)
- accessibility to resources / studies / etc for handicapped, POC, first-gen researchers, etc 
- reproducibility
"
"Looting, discrimination, commercialization"
NA
"Working and respecting native voices in archaeology. Working with the public. Working with the government."
NA
NA
"1. How to respectfully study the pasts of other peoples.
2. The pressures in CRM of doing work as quickly as possible and often confidentially. How do I handle the situation where the client requires that the data be kept confidential, even from the appropriate state record keepers?
3. How to balance spreading enthusiasm about archaeology while protecting the archaeological record. More specifically, what do I say to a person who is excitedly telling me about the objects they collected (often from their own lands but sometimes from protected lands)?
"
NA
NA
NA
"Open access to information within the field for researchers.
Going above and beyond legal minimums to ensure cultural protections."
"Discrimination. Destructive sampling of sites and artifacts. Digging just to dig, no coherent scientific plan or agenda, just a \"find more shit\" mentality."
"Safe educational and workplace environments!"
"The intersection of business and archaeology in CRM.
Sharing research and issues of confidentiality."
"Working with Indigenous people/groups/communities, open-access, dealing with sensitive cultural materials"
"Pot-hunting;
Commercial sale of artifacts retrieved with no regard to documentation of context;
Phase-I surveys in which field specimens are analyzed but are not permanently curated in permitted repositories for future scholarly followup study;"
"Bad contractors"
"Objective archaeological data recovery, analysis, and reporting and critical thinking. Discriminating fact from supposition."
"interactions with stakeholders such as Indigenous communities"
"Reporting results and consultation with descendant communities."
"1) Doing archaeology in ways that respect tribal interests and concerns; 2) Balancing open science with historic preservation."
"Broadly, 1) protection of cultural resources  2) protection of individuals"
"Legal and ethical accessioning and deaccessioning of archaeological objects, curatorial practices, how information is shared with the public to educate but balanced with safety of sites and peoples. Equal access and treatment of women for salary, employment, publication etc."
"Compliance concerns."
"How does one justify working with fossil fuel companies in a CRM context?"
"Indigenous and Minority Rights to their own heritage: Many archaeologists, probably most, work in contexts where they don't have total control over the way in which their excavations happen. Tribal participation and leadership in excavating prehistoric sites are still the exception, not the rule. Archaeology is a tool that is a necessary precursor to project development often, and too often the standards of CRM are not high enough. Tribal history is mangled through outdated boilerplate language, lack of time, or any number of factors. Same may go for some sites with special significance for historical minority communities, religious groups, women, and LGBT contexts. This is a structural issue of bad CRM budgets for atypical projects that may take more time and care to research and analyze. It is ethically bad, and it reduces the impact and significance of our work for these communities.

Publication: This is an old ethical issue that continues to be unaddressed. Projects frequently get dropped by the field personnnel due to priorities, change in career, loss of institutional support, whatever. We need to as a discipline ensure that at a minimum field reports are always completed. Repositories should all know which collections have been written up, to what degree, and finishing these reports should be prioritized over new fieldwork more often (i.e. in all cases unless the fieldwork is to address an imminent threat). 

SAA hostility to many of its members: This doesn't need to go in our Code, but there needs to be substantial structural change in how the SAA as an organization sees its responsibilities to the discipline and its members. This predates last year's conference debacle, but was reflected in it.  SAA is sitting on a stockpile of $8 million. We are in an international crisis. Groups like AAA are doing emergency loans and sharing the wealth. SAA is writing emails that provide their members with the option of asking for a refund for the 2020 conference, but the language was mealy and seemed designed to shame people into not requesting a refund. SAA seems to make a lot of its decisions based on what is easy and safe for the organization, not what is needed to protect people (the women at least year's conference) or make the discipline grow. Without commitment within the organization's staff and leadership, the Ethical principles overhaul is going to end up stuck in a committee that is not empowered to pass a set of ethical principles unless the staff and board support it. Given the decisionmaking by executive leadership over the last year, I do not want them making ethics-based decisions."
"equal accessibility to opportunities and resources, equal voices and representation"
NA
"Appropriate sexual behavior is number one. We must ensure that everyone can comfortably participate without fear."
"Responsible and open (data) curating of data
Open publication
Fair compensation (both in industry and within the Academy)
"
"Collaboration with Indigenous communities, intellectual property rights, respecting national legislation regarding archaeological resources and participation in archaeological research outside of the U.S., plagiarism and publication ethics, unequal power dynamics in academic institutions and cultural resource management, Title IX violations, and labor exploitation based on precarity."
"Fair treatment of all persons involved.  Ability to express knowledge without damaging the resouces."
"sexism, sexual harassment, verbal harassment, ageism"
"harassment, particularly in field and laboratory settings; interaction and inclusion of Indigenous voices in research and fieldwork"
"Working w collectors
My colleagues in CRM putting cash ahead of science or preservation in myriad ways
"
"Informed consent of those who are legal or moral stewards of the archaeological record, and open free access to data."
"honesty in all things"
NA
NA
"Sexual harassment, erasure of indigenous culture/heritage, black-market antiquities trade."
NA
"Care of collections and reports."
NA
"Consulting with stakeholders
Confronting sexual harassment, sexual violence, and not being afraid to get rid of abusers; putting in clear rules about these issues (not cover your ass lawyer-speak) and following them; making sure survivors feel safe participating; also confronting the fact this is a wide-scale issue
Decolonizing archaeology"
NA
NA
"Open data, access, and methods.  Archaeologists tend to be living in the Pleistocene with respect to open data."
NA
NA
"We need to ask why we do archaeology and why the public should support our work.  Many of us probably believe that by learning about the human past we are informing the present and preparing for the future.  However, there exists a great disconnect between the work we do as archaeologists and our engagement with the public.  One of the primary problems is the that our data and our publications are often hidden from the public behind paywalls.  If we are really to be a public good as field, we need to do everything in the open.  This is how we build the ultimate trust with the public.  It is disingenuous for to try to inform the public about the past but then hide our raw data and our main publications from them.  They should be able to check our work, as we all should be able to check each others work.  We need to be a science that includes reproducibility in our workflows.  We must as a society take a stance for open access publication of our articles/books, data, and our methods (such as source code).  This has to be a major component in our service to the public.  Please add open science to the ethics statement."
NA
NA
"-creating safe work environments for all

-unrestricted, international access to data and publications"
NA
NA
"The ignorance of and disregard for NAGPRA compliance at many institutions of higher learning

How smugly professional archaeologists tend to treat of state-recognized Indian tribes and/or any other non-federally recognized descendant communities as stakeholders in their projects

"
NA
NA
NA
"looting"
NA
"responsibility toward stakeholder communities (encompassing dissemination, repatriation, consultation); keeping the discipline safe, inclusive, and accessible for everyone; and responsibility toward the collections we create and manage
"
"Inclusion
Mindfulness surrounding aDNA research
Fairness and equality surrounding acceptance/promotion of ideas, research, employment of members from traditionally disenfranchised groups"
NA
NA
"The respectful engagement with other groups, peoples, and countries in which we conduct research. To be supportive of the initiatives by indigenous people in regards to the preservation and engagement with material culture."
"In academia use of adjuncts and exploitation of graduate students. 

In all areas gender discrimination and sexual harassment. 

Relationships with indigenous populations.

I haven't been in CRM for a long time so I am not sure what the problems are now."
"Sexual and gender harassment and assault
Racism
Equity for people of different income levels
Exploitation of graduate student workers and adjuncts in higher ed"
"Relationship of the discipline to the many different publics, and how we can most appropriately interact."
"The respectful documentation, excavation, repatriation, and sharing of the archaeological record. A guideline for how to conduct ethical archaeology and work in an ethical way."
"research misconduct
plagiarism
conflicts of interest
bullying
looting of artifacts/intellectual property"
"respect for human life, not only objects"
NA
NA
"Repatriation"
NA
NA
"Preservation - both of sites and of legacy collections/data, and balancing the needs and concerns of multiple stakeholders"
"Project proponents and departments pushing for \"clearances\" in an extremely aggressive manner, faster often than can be evaluated or consulted.

Fiber Optic and Gas Line companies running rough-shod over S106

"
NA
"Preservation of heritage resources (from development, climate impacts), mitigating equality issues (women, minorities, and descendant communities), and protecting colleagues and students from harassment."
"Gender issues related to male authority related to their current position and inequalities in scientific debate, funding and knowledge construction/deconstruction"
NA
"Consultation with community stakeholders - not happening as regularly as it should
Looting and vandalism of archaeological sites on public lands by members of the public
"
"Appropriate care & protection of archaeological resources.
Consultation & working together with relevant native groups.
Informing the public/taxpayers while not jeopardizing resources
Identifying & correcting any forms of abuse
Timely presentation of findings & their significance"
"I am retired and consult in a sol-proprietary way so I am out of the main-stream archaeological community. My biggest problem as a female during my career was disproportionate respect and promotion when working in a strictly archaeological situation. For the past 25 years I have worked as an employee for Native American tribes and did not have that ethical problem."
"Responsibilty towards descendant communities."
"scientific conduct, site destruction, stewardship, conservation, diversity of stakeholders, looting and sale of antiquities, discrimination"
"Collaboration with descendant and indigenous communities; archaeologies that serve the interests and needs of descendant and indigenous communities"
"CRM practitioners cheating their clients.
Academic archaeologists undercutting everyone else."
"Sexual and other forms of harassment and intimidation."
"I think my colleagues are currently most concerned with sexual harassment and related issues. Personally, I live where avocational collecting is common so I see many ethical concerns in interacting with avocational archaeologists, collectors, and the public. In addition, there is a range of issues involving descendant communities. I am tangentially involved with a facility that curates a great deal of material and am concerned with the NAGPRA compliance and other aspects of curation."
"Destruction of archaeological sites across the world due to development, government policies and conflict
Sexual misconduct, especially in the field, both under- and over-reporting"
NA
"The failure of archaeologists to accept alternative ways of knowing. The overuse of jargon to exacerbate sloppy writing and verbal communication skills. Many archaeologists believe that they are the keepers of the gate to the past limiting who gets to explore and explain the past. The over-reliance and incorrect use of the scientific method resulting in limited data sets and incomplete results. All of these issues can present incorrect explanations of the past, robbing the public of their heritage."
"prioritizing native/local/indigenous people views in doing work, involvement of native/indigenous people, mediation training to make people good advocates for the resources, better report writing with more inclusive sources from source countries and modern citations, acknowledging the colonial perspective in old references and how they harm living communities."
"Ownership of artifacts; protecting sites and artifacts; appropriate treatment of human remains; misuse of artifacts for political purposes."
NA
"Sexual harassment, data/idea theft, institutional racism"
"\"ownership\" of cultural remains"
"Some primary ethical concerns in my opinion include: Appropriate professional behavior, proper preservation of physical and digital archaeological data, proper public dissemination practices, and proper conduct with descendant and local communities"
NA
NA
"Professional accountability, stewardship of resources (in situ and collections/documents), and public dissemination of knowledge."
"Sexual discrimination, harassment, and assault. 
Lack of diversity. 
Education"
NA
"The commercialisation of archaeological excavations."
NA
"People purloining others' research ideas and data
Failing to disclose all vested interests to communities where we work and failure to robustly include them"
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
"Rights of indigenous peoples. Private property rights versus public rights. Curation responsibility. International black market and federal responsibility."
NA
NA
"The relationship between archaeological heritage protection and personal and corporative economic interests."
"Interaction with avocationals and the promotion of non-degreed investigators in popular tv programming"
"Looting or destruction of archaeological resources (intentional or unintentional), accessibility of archaeological findings, inclusivity of the discipline, and safety of archaeologists in the field/at professional events."
"CRM companies that do not support good work, agencies asleep at the wheel and rubber-stamping subpar work."
"Irresponsible collecting and collections management, lack of Tribal-led decision making, poor consultation efforts, and the overall continued harm our field has caused and continues to cause to Descendant communities."
"Archaeologists have serious ethical lapses. Among the most serious of these is the insistence of the archaeological community that they can and should speak for cultural resources writ large, not just the scientific or cultural interests of archaeology. 

CRM, academic, and state and federal archaeologists regularly recommend (and often say that they have determined) that no historic properties will be effected by undertakings if significant archaeological resources are not found during a survey. Even when Tribe have identified ethnographic resources or TCPs, many archaeologists insist that they have addressed Tribal concerns through archaeology, or by noting that popular collections of Indian legends don't mention their project area. Further, many CRM firms recommend archaeological monitoring during projects, even when the concern is for ethnographic landscape or other resource values important to Tribes. 

This outrageous behavior serves the business interests of archaeologists, and creates busy work to keep archaeologists employed. It does not, however, benefit the resources or tribal communities for whom they hold value, and the SAA needs to discourage their members from doing this. 

Many archaeologists also insist that working with looters is ethical, since looted collections may still have scientific value. However, this again discounts the value that ancestral sites and resources have to tribal communities."
"Archaeologists running roughshod over indigenous rights and concerns"
"Lack of respect for indigenous ownership of data; lack of incorporation of indigenous data sovereignty principles; field collection policies that ignore curation crisis; mandatory \"curation\" of collections by federal agencies that do not meet federal curation standards; CRM-based archaeology that neither positions people or data first, but dollars and relationships with developers and agencies to secure future contracts"
"Comprehending multiple views of existing in the field, while accepting who can interpret the past land uses, whether it be from tangible or intangible."
"Open access to data of every Archaeologist project after 5 or 10 years of use.  A platform that would permit such access and storage worlwide according to geographical areas of the world. Standars for such open access data. Ways to protect copyright of such databases."
"Identifying proper consultation
Misuse of principles in 36CFR800 to exclude Tribes from approved curation.
Collection of Artifacts
Protecting confidentiality of Tribal Sites"
NA
NA
"Lack of communication with Federally Recognized Tribes whose sites are being studied."
NA
NA
NA
NA
"Safety of students, staff/faculty and members of the public/other stakeholders during all aspects of archaeological practice. 
The practice of archaeological sampling and analysis through to publication and disemination of knowldege, ensuring this is not enclosed within only the academy. 
The lack of support for open acccess publication. 
The insular nature of hiring and lack of transparency in the procedures."
NA
NA
NA
NA
"- ethical treatment of the archaeological record, including publication; ethical treatment of others, including colleagues and students on campus and in the field; principled stance on cultural heritage, illicit art market, and museum acquisition; attention to the number of grad students we take into a program in light of the job market; diversity; support for most vulnerable professionals, such as adjuncts."
NA
"As professionals we need to Incorporate descendant communities as partners in inquiry of sites whether sacred or secular."
NA
"Where to draw the line for ideological influences in how the field is legislated and how this affects how science is done."
"sexual harrassment/sexual assault
other types of harrassment bullying
inequity for underrepresented groups in jobs, funding, publishing"
"Truthfully reporting extent of fieldwork."
NA
"Not enough understanding of obligations under NAGPRA legislation, not enough willingness to collaborate with Tribal partners even when the law does not require consultation for research design, and CRM firms do not always comply with National, State, or Tribal standards in the field."
NA
NA
"Sexual harassment in the field"
NA
NA
NA
"The fact that most archaeological companies use software that costs a lot of money and hides it's source code. Also publishers charge too much money for the right to view journals and books.
"
NA
NA
"This likely varies by locality, but in Southern California, where I work as an archaeologist for a government agency, I have found the work of archaeologists working in CRM firms to be woefully lacking in rigor and accountability. I have found, for example, numerous instances of archaeologists using pedestrian surveys to speak to the likelihood of sub-surface cultural resources. I have seen archaeologists more concerned about their employer's budget than they are (which is saying something) and using that as a reason to resist doing any archaeological testing (only pedestrian survey and monitoring). If they do test, many only want to use augers, even in highly sensitive archaeological sites. I see archaeologists propose collecting artifacts during surveys and testing when there is no budget for analysis, curation, or reburial. I also see CRM archaeologists routinely use boilerplate historical/ethnographic background sections more brazenly plagiarized than almost anything I experienced teaching undergrads for five years. At times, the ethnographic background sections are taken from other reports that were clearly located elsewhere in California. Some (though not all) have a very adversarial relationship with local tribal communities. In short, as the SHPO has no set standards for CRM work, the result has been a prolonged \"race to the bottom\" quality-wise. 

In academia, the lack of community-based participatory research is distressing. The practice of individual archaeologists and academic institutions buying land for the purposes of excavating without having to answer to the local community should be banned."
"Safety of archaeologists on site, in classrooms, at conferences.



"
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
"data sharing"
NA
"Contract archaeology"
"-Issues stemming from the colonial roots of archaeology, including, but not limited to, the various ways in which indigenous people have little control over what happens to ancestral places, objects, and people
-looting and the commercialization of the archaeological record; finding ways to productively engage collectors and others who don't necessarily see these things as a problem
-issues surrounding the curation of data and objects: both the need to responsibly curate digital material and finding ways to facilitate access to data and results while still protecting the archaeological record and maintaining some kind of peer-review system
-inequity within the discipline
-potential disconnects between how we train students (and the number of students we train) and the job market 
(edited later to add: the preservation of the archaeological record. This is so baked into my world view that I didn't initially think of it, but given current federal policy, yes this is a very active concern.)"
"Transparency, integrity & civility (in Expressing intent, perspective, methods, costs, etc), and whether dealing with the public, colleagues, students, or contractors."
NA
"Money"
NA
NA
NA
"The primary concern is that archaeologist quickly state \"no cultural resources noted\" which it is not too.

Consider this:
Can you know someone upon a first meeting? Can you really know someone if you visited them twice in a year or does it get time to know a person?

Lesson:
An area that is survey will look different from year to year and season to season - some plants only bloom every few years or maybe every ten years, it is difficult even for me to comment on an area when it is being surveyed for development, but it is necessary to consider vegetation, history, visual landscapes and the overall holistic approach.

Secondly is the need to collect artifacts - it needs to stop. I have worked with the Public Lands Commission in California and requested that if artifacts need to be moved that California Transportation (CalTrans) allow the Native American community determine how, when and where to put them during a 4 lane highway extension.

Curation and study are not going to restore our heritage - curation creates a money and staffing problem for several agencies - why not allow Natives decided what happens to artifacts?"
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
"I think that is the commitment with the resposability to provide a properly management to the archaeological cultural heritage. This involve since the properly record in field work, to the broad difusion of the investigation results, passing for the proper organization and processing of data. In this three cases, it requires a strong students preparation in field tecniques, data precessing and analysis, and a estimule to the commitment of share and translate the archaeological evidence to a broad audience too. The archaeologist must understand the importance of bring the past to the present and the future."
"Publication of and access to data continues to be a challenge in our field. As our science is inherently destructive, it is critical that we share the archaeological information we have collected, analyzed, and interpreted with the broader archaeological community. Timely peer-reviewed publication of data and research results is important for many reasons, not the least of which are the ability to conduct more comprehensive data comparisons across larger scales and to develop new research questions and lines of scientific inquiry that may otherwise go unaddressed. We owe it to the resource (the site, feature, historic building, artifact assemblage, etc.) to publish our results and make our data as widely available as possible while maintaining and ensuring the resource's protection in perpetuity."
NA
NA
"Ethically working with communities, children, under-represented communities; creating safe educational and workplace environments; quality of professionalism (why don't we have to prove on occasion we're still up to date and knowledgeable in our field?)"
NA
NA
NA
"Contracted Archaeologists are still very secretive, in a way, at letting Tribes know or even have true access to artifacts found in the field. It is no doubt protocols but they need to be more transparent moving forward even if they feel it might be a problem or ethics issue on there part"
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
"greed and notoriety"
NA
NA
"- Ethical interactions with descendant communities
- Ethical treatment of trainees/students in the field and lab
- Ethical research conduct, such as, best practices in field research, timely publication of results, appropriate use of grant funds"
"not applicable for me."
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
"Excavations in the times of increased climate change caused erosion/ land degradation. Lax guidelines and regulations when dealing with Natives."
NA
"Poor quality of work"
"Balancing the protection of the archaeological record while engaging armature societies, private collectors, and other special interests groups. 
"
"Research and Publishing ethics
"
NA
"poor service for clients in the CRM field - unmandated research being charged to clients"
"Sexual harassment, training of students, dealing with Indigenous groups, ethical development projects"
"government oversight"
"I understand if not more concerned about more  subtle discrimination that typically lands middle class white men with a majority of the upper supervisory positions in CRM, and to a lesser extent academia."
"Respect for the cultural beliefs of native indigenous people."
"One problem is the increasing dishonesty by archaeologists in academia to embellish the truth in publishing and in their cv, and this has everything to do with the pressures of academia.
Another big problem is equality and discrimination based on race, sex, sexual orientation, or other things."
NA
"Looting, greater protections for sites, lack of support for students, along with a pervasive unwillingness of eatablished archaeologists to accept competing interpretations of their works."
"Treatment of junior staff; fostering career development (PI opportunities, etc.), unrealistic lowballing on bids (cough FOREST SERVICE cough)"
"Engagement
Equality 
Diversity
Harassment"
"relationship with descendent communities"
"My primary concerns involve greater collaboration with indigenous groups and issues surrounding sexual harassment"
"Engagement of descendant communities and training of descendant scholars."
"protecting archaeological sites and collections from destruction; ethical relations with descendants of occupants and neighbors of sites; ethical treatment of colleagues, especially those with less power;"
"Fair treatment of indigenous people and of treatment of local partners, accountability for our actions, ensuring our results are available to the public through good record keeping and public outreach, good stewardship of archaeological resources (including repatriation of material culture where/when appropriate), and creating safe educational spaces and work spaces.
It is particular important that our students are given good training for how to interact with local partners and that they receive good training on things like Title 9."
"Treatment of descendant communities of all types
Treatment of staff/crew/employees by people with positions of power oveerr them
Monitoring of interpersonal propriety on crew/staff - like between peers - for harassment etc. 
Internationally, protection of heritage"
"Archaeologists treating landowners disrespectfully 

Discrimination and harassment within the field of archaeology

Treatment and pay of lower level archaeologists (graduate students, field techs, early career museum professionals, etc)"
"I think my primary concern is that there are going to be too many new regulations that takes the fun out of archaeology."
NA
"Conservation of archaeological sites. Most often the ethics codes (including the present SAA code) do not address the responsabilities of the archaeologist in backfilling excavations, granting that part of the site will be preserved, or in a CRM context, chosing in situ preservation as the most desirable alternative, rather than \"lets excavate it all\"."
NA
"Declining levels of commitment to good scholarship."
"unethical antiquities trade"
"1)  Dissemination of information to the public - working to make information accessible and relevant

2)  Accountability to Indigenous peoples - we must work more to collaborate and consult with indigenous groups when working in contexts that are connected to their history and traditions."
"Responsible public engagement, site protections, collaboration with diverse stakeholders. Equity of access and experience within our field"
"In CRM work, the client, archaeologist, regulator relationship needs clarification.  Must not also forget to cover pb ilic education function. Curation responsibilities should vibe the function of the legal owner, with advice of the archaeologist."
"Timely reporting, and excavations that continue without reports being submitted
Lack of arrangements for artifacts and samples to be appropriately curated / deposited
Lack of data sharing / timely deposition of data in publicly available repositories"
"harassment"
"Indigenous sovereignty over their own past/properly engaging with indigenous groups"
"Sexual harassment and abuse"
"Unqualified staff doing work, short cutting appropriate tasks, intentionally mis-recording cultural sites"
"The proliferation of emphases on ethics."
"NAGPRA"
"Are our work practices in line with the concerns brought up by the local community including any additional tribal concerns. This includes the handling of human remains and any areas deemed sacred."
"Systemic racism, ignoring descendant communities, sexual harassment and assault."
"Sexual harassment and equity issues among archaeologists"
"Open science: inclusiveness, reproducibility, and accessibility of research results to the general public."
"Data sharing and public access which might lead to destruction of archaeological resources"
"I think the primary ethical concerns surround issues of source communities being included in research, and workplace safety and equality for archaeologists."
NA
"Inadequate consultation with descendant communities

Limitations on access to CRM reports due to claims of proprietary information

Restricted flow of benefits from heritage research"
"* scientific ethics - responsible collection and curation of archaeological data, relationships and interactions with host, source, and descendant communities, relationships with other stakeholders, ethics of destructive analysis

* archival ethics - who has access to collections and data once archived, are researchers from host, descendant, or source communities unfairly excluded access due to distance or financial concerns? I'd also include issues around repatriation here

* interpersonal, professional ethics - sexual harassment, intimidation, bullying 

* intersection and interrelationship between academic and professional study and looting and illegal antiquities trade"
"Rights of indigenous people in deciding what happens to cultural heritage; appropriate treatment of students/female/queer individuals in a field setting (specifically in terms of sexual harassment/abuse)."
"sexual harassment;
age and gender discrimination;
politicization of scholarly debate

"
"Publication of legally confidential documents detailing site location information on the internet."
NA
"The thriving antiquities trade and the persistence of inappropriate field behavior."
"- Handling of ethics violations among the membership (i.e. how both victims/survivors, those accused, and those found responsible of violations are treated)

- Standard ethical issues regarding artifacts and human remains that are more frequently and explicitly dealt with in our field."
"Minority representation
Treatment of temporary employees
Poor research passing peer review
Re-publishing of similar articles by small circles of researchers in multiple journals to increase their publication and reference rates
False representation of the certainty of statistical analyses in genetics and isotope data 
Use of field school and grad student labor to prop up otherwise underfunded research programs
Lack of public engagement
Lack of support for modern data science methods
Not taking Native American rights seriously, tokenism
Not taking social safety seriously, not taking sexual assault seriously
Lack of professionalism

"
"The field's relationship to Native Americans and other descendant communities. We still have a long way to go in this regard and I would like to see indigenous rights at the forefront of a revised code of ethics. 

Bioarchaeological research presents a multitude of ethical concerns. The SAA should take a stance against studies such as Ancient DNA, skeletal isotopes, etc. which are conducted on human remains without the consent of and collaboration with relevant living communities. NAGPRA protects many Native American remains in the United States, but many more fall outside its purview. The potential legality of many such studies does not make them ethically sound. Furthermore, in much of Latin America and many other areas of the world, no such protections exist. In these cases, the code of ethics may be the only guidelines influencing these studies. Therefore it is important for the code of ethics to have strong guidance in this regard. 

Another ethical concern is challenging the myth of archaeological stewardship as a justification unto itself for archaeological research. Stewardship as a concept needs to be interrogated. I do not believe that this should be given primacy in our code of ethics. 

I think it should be stressed as an ethical imperative that we address the difficult social and political history of archaeology, especially its colonial origins and continued ties to colonial and capitalist practice when teaching archaeology to various publics and training new archaeologists."
"Gender equity
Sexual harassment 
Indigenous rights regarding their heritage"
"Attributions and fair use. Professionalism"
"The inequality between men and women working in the field.  Also the division between land ownership and archaeological responsibilities.  It seems like fights over land such as Bears Ears and who controls the area, or the laws regarding private land ownership and the ethics of protecting our heritage are increasing."
"Culturally sensitive materials, materials of concern to indigenous peoples we are engaging with."
"1. Respect towards colleagues, their work, their ideas and their lives.
2. Respect towards cultural heritages of our countries."
"1. The lack of inclusion of appropriate public outreach and education on projects or resulting from projects.
2. Field schools that haven't written up results of years, if not decades of field work.
3. The idea that to be an archaeologist you have to excavate.
4. Under utilization of archaeological collections for research.
5. Indigenous and/or descendant community involvement at all levels of projects."
"Ownership of collections"
"Sexual discrimination. Inequities in pay based on gender. Illegal antiquities trafficking and unethical but legal destruction of sites and trade of artifacts in the USA."
"Open access.

The past does not belong to the Society for American Archaeology.  It belongs to the native people whose history we study. Other stakeholders include granting agencies and the public who pays for archaeological research through taxes.

The time of hiding our results behind a paywall is over.  If we want to promote and protect the past, access to the journals must be provided at no additional cost to those who wish it."
"When and how to properly consult Native American groups regarding a site or artifacts. How much to tell the public about artifacts or a site, when there is a concern for looters or other privacy issues. Who owns the artifacts and sites archaeologists find."
"Balancing the corporate, governmental, and budgetary demands with proper archaeological protocol."
"1) Doing archaeology responsibly to the archaeological record; 2) doing archaeology responsible to Native Americans; 3) treating all people (crew, clients, Native Americans, the interested [and uninterested] public) with respect and consideration at all times; 4) having a good time doing archaeology with items 1-3 held in mind--but not getting so hung up on everything that we take the joy out of what we do."
"looting, plagiarism, harassment, politics"
"Protecting collections from being treated as financial assets
Protection and preservation of natural and cultural heritage
Ethical interactions among practitioners of all types 
Sharing of data and results 
"
"Our responsibility to descendant communities and the communities we work in
Structural biases against historically underrepresented groups within the scholarly community
#MeToo concerns of sexual harrassment/abuse/assault both in the field and at home"
"Age and female discrimination"
NA
"Ensuring constructive relationships with indigenous groups.
Also, the role of archaeological clearance in enabling controversial projects such as the border wall and oil and gas infrastructure."
"Representation of all stakeholders, particularly those who have been marginalized or not included in the past, in conversations regarding their own cultural heritage and interpretations thereof. As an extension, the recognition of expertise that comes from living culture daily (or non-academic expertise)."
"Equity in access to resources needed to do the work, including museum collections
Coping with gender issues
Getting work published that has lain for decades
Expectations for asking people to do work for NO PAY
and concerns for the unvoiced and poorly represented people who might be involved in cultural heritage work.
"
"Preservation/interpretation vs. excavation (e.g. as part of mitigation). Repatriation of native/aboriginal remains. Identifying and evaluating intangible heritage and archaeological landscapes. Lack of diversity and representation in the discipline. Poor quality federal and state agency project reviews. Low academic practitioner accountability."
"the long-term consequences of emphasizing a processual archaeology approach in cultural resource management which results in disenfranchising descendant (Native American) communities from having an effective and meaningful voice in the construction of historical narratives of their personal heritage. A nave arrogance and confidence that archaeologists generate the \"truth\" about history."
"Dealing with the colonialist past vis a vis Native Americans - giving up of power"
"1) Government regulators have absolutely no resources, nor the will, to police the quality of CRM work.  I've watched way too many obviously faked and/or incompetently done reports get passed from shpo to federal agencies without any real scrutiny.  As long as the right box gets ticked, the project moves forward.

"
"co-optation of the discipline (research and social justice) by multinational coorporations"
"Stakeholder connections to work; Work that is not in concert with needs of descendant communities; ALSO - sexual harassment issues in the field, in the academic arena... we need strong statements and ways to train, make aware, and support people."
"Sexual harassment.
Fair pay and treatment of women and minorities."
"Sexual harassment and assault in the field and otherwise in the discipline; ethical use of archaeological resources"
"In addition to addressing clear cases of sexual harassment, as has been the focus recently, organizations like SAA should also be addressing broader issues stemming from systemic inequalities along the lines of gender/sexuality, race/ethnicity, age, income, etc. These issues will affect those in academia and in applied fields, though perhaps differently."
"destruction of sites through U.S. governmental weakening of protections"
"Gender relations (the old boys are dying off but the young ones are even worse)

Cultural heritage protections from megabusiness and greedy governments (i.e. Bears Ears)"
"I don't think they've changed-- being an ethical person hasn't changed, the only difference is that the ethics code has to be updated periodically to be explicit about some issues because apparently some people won't behave ethically unless it's written down. Not sure why, you'd think people would behave ethically without needing it to be spelled out in an ethics code. But that's where we are."
"How to work ethically with descendant communities.  
How to ensure that our students and colleagues can work in environments free of sexual harassment and discrimination.
How to preserve the archaeological record, which is increasingly under threat.
How to effectively share our work with the public and help educate them about the importance of preserving the past."
"People over extending their level of training, claiming they are capable of more than they are."
"Ensuring that appropriate communication with descendants is taking place prior to any archeological dig that could possibly result in the extraction of the remains of ancestors of said descendants."
"1. Worker pay and benefits for field technicians
2. Loss of scientific data due to Native American concerns
3. Lack of access to data for students and researchers due to Agency gatekeepers"
"Sexual harassment"
NA
NA
"1. Treatment of women and others from unempowered and underprivileged backgrounds through both creating safe spaces for them to practice as archaeologists and fomenting change that opens up opportunities and provides evidence of success for such individuals.
"
NA
"Sexual harassment, unfair power dynamics, dismissive behaviour towards female colleagues."
"Favoring the concerns of the client over the resource.
Low biding projects and then not delivering a good product.
"
"Repatriation not just of human remains, but objects like the Elgin Marbles - should they stay somewhere that they will most likely be better preserved and cared for (and made visible) or go back to their original home... potentially with uncertainty of the objects surviving."
"personal conduct/sexual harassment"
"Educating people of all ages about archaeology in culturally appropriate ways.
Maintaining an emphasis on stewardship of archaeological resources now and in the future. 
Making sure that the spirit of NHPA (for the public good) is achieved in all archaeological endeavors.
Curating collections properly now and in the future.
Completing reports of field work in a timely manner."
"Respecting Native Rights
treatment of women and minorities
recognition of students contributions to a faculty member's research
recognition of community members role and participation in research and not just as 
\"informants\""
"The problem of racial and gender discrimination in the discipline and the organizaitons that employ archaeologists.

The problem of the protection of archaeological sites from damage or destruction.

The problem of making sure to respect the rights of Native Americans and other indigenous people to sites and objects from sites.

The need to protect and preserve unpublished documentary, digital, and object materials from archaeological investigations for future research."
"Treatment of human remains
Adherence to archaeological standards and best practices
Effective consultation with tribal representatives
"
NA
NA
"Stewardship and Records and Preservation"
"It's not a new one and will likely always be of concern: Balancing professional and personal preference for preservation with the various legal frameworks under which we work as well as the business of doing archaeology."
"Racial disparities."
"1. lack of high quality, accessible reports from field work; 2. sexual harassment especially in field settings; 3. lack of oversight of some government archaeology offices"
"issues within the field itself - sexism, racism, all types of discrimination"
"Moderns ethics focus on rights of control and exclusion and are therefore connected to copyright. Such ethical controls seeks to establish authority and downplay free speech, and must necessarily embed control in one or more groups at the expense of others. I often fail to see the philosophical basis of these codes, though the political dynamic is clear. For me the key issue is ensure rather than preventing multivocality."
"Sexual harassment
Misogyny"
"Tough question, as I believe we have internal professional ethical concerns and out-ward facing \"beyond the profession\" concerns. The SAA Principles (in the 1990s) were mostly about internal issues before, but now have been incorporating/thinking about effect beyond the profession.

I think we need nuanced balance. These are complicated issues and the one thing in teaching them is that students tend to knee-jerk into right/wrong answers. When it comes to SOME of the SAA Principles, I think we need to discuss why we have these in place, but then also give room for debate, re-interpretation, and evolution over time. I know that is what the task force is taking into consideration.  I strongly support the addition of the workplace ethics statements, which is relatively new, and support more language on sexual harassment and assault. However, these are importantly issues that go well beyond archaeology as a profession. These are societal changes we need to make in general, not just as archaeologists."
"SAA code needs updating so as to include recognition and respect for Native Americans. Consider using CAA code from Canada as a template.  

Student and non student working and study conditions, Principle #9 very important."
NA
"Professionalism and science in all aspects of the discipline.  Excavating for the sole purpose of public or media attention without a solid research design is not professional.  Reporting results based on anecdotal information via the media/press without full analysis, formal reporting and peer review is not science nor is it professional."
NA
"Lack of gender diversity in professional leadership positions; insufficient training for college students in historic preservation law and practices; college professors who denigrate (either implicitly or explicitly) cultural resource management work; some archaeologists tend to excavate in situations where appropriate scientific assessment could accomplished with in-field study and no excavation;  similarly, sometimes too much excavation occurs when much less could yield adequate results; large-scale excavations of preserved sites (e.g., Archaeological Conservancy properties) using field school students, volunteers, et al.;  insufficient use of museum collections for student research and research by professionals;  not reporting the results of university and college archaeological field school projects (even if only preliminary description of methods and findings)."
NA
"Pirating of data for early publication.
Sexual Harassment
LGBTQ bias
Site vandalism
Insensitivity to Native American concerns"
"the usual: destruction of sites, sale of looted antiquities"
"Largely issues in how temps are treated in CRM."
NA
"Not sure"
"accurate representation of the tribal voice"
"This varies greatly based on field.  For example, NAGPRA and Indigenous peoples' rights to their own heritage is obviously one, but only applies directly to people working in archaeology with indigenous communities.  Other issues would be the ethics of running field schools (how to do this responsibly with students gaining real expertise and not acting as free labor); sexual harassment and inappropriate behavior in the field; the ethics of museum display; and the ethics of working with human remains."
"1. Defining the proper \"ethical\" balance between archaeology as a science, and the desires of other groups with standing (nation-states, descendant communities, religious groups), especially when these conflict with one another. 
2. Looting of sites and selling artifacts on the black market, especially when buying and selling of such items supports terrorist organizations (e.g., Hobby Lobby buying artifacts from various ISIL groups)."
"The politics of heritage, especially in colonial and postcolonial contexts, collaborative research with descendent communities, and the relationship between multiple ways of knowing and claiming the past and it's remains."
NA
"relationships between professional archaeologists and their clients, ensuring business is conducted ethically"
NA
"Respect of indigenous rights.
Sexual harassment and the failure to remove known predators.
Higher ups being willing to accept the status quo and pushing back against those seeking safer working conditions and increased diversity.  Sometimes this means offering lip service to say things will be better while acting in a contradictory manner."
"Personal relations on all levels - between field workers and the local population, internal in the team and between team members and other researchers/institutions."
"Relation between archaeologists and non-archaeologists"
"Treatment of human remains and sacred objects, treatment of studets"
"loss of ability to perform research on human remains."
"Being transparent about what your, or your project, is doing with all the relevant parties, and doing so in way that makes them actual participants and not someone you talk to after everything is decided..  Not really a problem for most 106 projects as that process usually (!) manages to include the right players in a timely way.  But I think archaeologists still have a significant challenge consulting with tribal communities on non-106 projects.  There is still a strong tendency to develop the project scope and plan of operation before reaching out to other possible partners and asking them to join.  This doesn't provide them the opportunity to join in the development and help make the project what they want it to be.
At the same time, while my current role is telling archaeologists how they can meet the SHPO's expectations while accommodating tribal expectations as well, if I were to develop my own personal research project (retirement?), I would certainly let the appropriate Tribes know of my plans, but I am not sure how I would react if one or more of them had significant concerns about the proposal.  Certainly would talk with them about it, but at what level am i willing to give them veto power over what I do - no answer to this (yet).

One of the standard phrases in 106 is 'making a reasonable and good faith effort'.  it is not always clear what that should entail.  While our office has developed field and report standards as one means to address that, you can't cover every situation.  what are the ethical implications of this standard?
Where I run into this often is in dealing with unmarked and abandoned cemeteries.  What level of effort is 'right' when trying to find descendent communities who should participate in decisions impacting their ancestors graves (tribal, slave, or other).  Especially in the case of slave or 19th century rural family cemeteries where there is no obvious descendent population?
I often find myself thinking of the 'reasonable and good faith' standard as essentially coming down to \"can I defend my actions in court\".  Have never been called into court to defend, but this is how i often find myself assessing the effort.  Is the fear of court a reasonable ethical standard to use?"
"To rectify the human rights abuses committed by archaeologists on indigenous peoples: the consent of descendant communities must be sought prior to disturbing the material evidence of their presence on the land; indigenous peoples must be offered the right to participate in archaeological field work, excavation, analysis, and curation of material record of their own culture; indigenous perspectives must be given priority over non-indigenous views in analysis, publication, and in interpretive materials."
"How much to share with the public to generate support for protection."
NA
"1) Conserving archaeological sites and materials; 2) addressing descendant community concerns; 3) educating the public about archaeological ethics and descendant community concerns without debasing members of the public and their existing ethics."
"Appropriately and sensitively conducting research with descendant communities
Handling issues of power and harassment within the field for students and professionals who are members of marginalized groups"
"Sexual harassment and diversity and inclusion

Ethical practice of archaeology (research, fieldwork, publication, and presentation)"
"Academic achaeologists continuing to train generations of academic archaeologists knowing that most of their students have very little chance of finding a position in academia. Academic archaeologists failing to accurately inform their students about the job market. Academic archaeologists wilful ignorant of the CRM workplace and not training their students for it. Academic archaeologists exploiting their students and volunteers as free labor in the field and in the lab. Academic archaeologists actively subverting professional-level compensation by running CRM companies attached to public universities and paying workers \"student rates\" or nothing at all for their labor."
"It always starts with some variation of the Golden Rule and first do not harm"
NA
NA
NA
NA
"Ethical professional."
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
"There is too much emphasis on digging and not enough financial, social, and professional support for long term curation, collection studies, publications, report writing, and public engagement with existing collections."
NA
"Political and social concerns obscuring the scientific pursuit of knowledge"
"Sexual harassment in the profession.
Exploitative nature of academia and the tenure system.

Destruction of indigenous cultural patrimony."
"Lack of consultation with stakeholders.  
A focus on sensationalism and theatrics over meaningful archaeology."
NA
NA
NA
"Wow. Big question. 1. Continued relentless digging that is encouraged by field schools in a time of curation crisis, 2 continued collecting of artifacts by faculty in academic settings with no concern for the collections future  academic institutions bear responsibility that they rarely assume, 3. Continued hoarding of data, 4. Continued misunderstanding of tribal sovereignty (seen as reverse racism)  this was evident in a survey by SAA a year or two ago, perhaps it will die out with the old timers. And finally, shouldnt SAA have an ethical responsibility to its members? While what happened in Albuquerque was awful, the way SAA handled it was even worse. My interactions with HQ suggests lessons still need to be absorbed."
"How to maintain collections in perpetuity; negotiating development pressure; over-excavation for the sake of research; publication, or lack thereof"
"1. responsibilities to descendent communities and other public stakeholders
2. digital archiving/accessibility of data
3. transparent data statements
4. availability of data for future research/replication of results (funding state GIS etc; use of tDAR)
5. need for data synthesis (along the lines of the Coalition of Archaeological Synthesis)

"
"Stewardship is a big issue considering the ongoing destruction of archaeological sites and the fact that the vast majority of sites are in private hands. Public education and outreach are also of great concern. The vast majority of Americans have very little idea of what archaeologists do and the distorted media portrayal of archaeology still prevails."
"1) Appropriate management of relations with stakeholder groups.
2) Addressing colonial legacies of archaeology in archaeological practice.
3) Increasing representation within practitioners.
4) Ensure safe workplaces for all archaeologists and archaeology students.
5) Gender inequality in job placement and promotion throughout archaeological careers."
"Relationship between archaeologists and the descendants of the ancestral people they study."
"The continued use of sexist narratives and talking points within archaeology, eg: a particular site being \"sexy\" or the idea that fieldwork is a \"boys club\"

The increasing amount of sexual harassment and violence reported by students and professionals in the field- holding men (it's almost always men) who sexually harass or assault people accountable 

The concern for respecting Indigenous sovereignty in pre-contact archaeology, being increasingly respectful of human remains and culturally-sensitive materials and lands; we should be trying to empower Indigenous peoples through our work and that includes increasing opportunities for Indigenous youth to become involved with the practice and narrative of archaeology. 

I guess in a general sense, the primary ethical concern for archaeology going forwards should be to vulnerable communities, especially those who have been negatively affected by racial and class structures in the U.S."
"The lack of consequences to those that break ethical codes. In other disciplines that have to obtain license, the breaking of ethical codes results in the loss of the licenses, thus loss of a career. In archaeology, if you are not a member of an  organization, you do not need to follow any ethical standard and can continue to practice archaeology. IF you break and ethical code and are found guilty, you are simply removed from the organization with no ramification to the individuals career.

The issue with the SAA code is that there is no ethical obligations to colleagues and employers. We, as archaeologists in SAA consider ourselves professional but have no ethical code regarding how we interact or treat or work with our colleagues, employers or students.

SAA also has a weak Safe Educational and Workplace Environments code. A safe environemnt is more than sexual harassment. Again, no clear ramifications for violating the code."
"Sexual harassment"
"Looting of sites
Poor field practices in excavation
Proper education of ethical standards"
"Overinterpretation/falsification of data; abuse of power by senior archaeologists towards junior archs, females, minorities, etc."
"Dealing with CRM work and having an ethical approach towards the bids of other colleagues. 
The approach of archaeologists to work with communities, viewing these only as providers of workforce and not as providing knowledge and complementing research. 
The misconceived idea that working at a site gives authority on that site and adjacent area. 
The way archaeologists deal with rules and norms in other countries."
"In CRM, pressure from energy development companies and archaeologists trying to follow basic ethical principles and government compliance regulations."
"Equality based on race, gender, ethnicity.  Specific adherence to ARPA and NAGPRA.  Going beyond NAGPRA to develop meaningful and sustainable relationships with tribes and indigenous communities.  Engagement of tribal and descendant communities in our work, hearing and including their voice and histories - written, drawn and oral.  Including tribal and descendant community participation through paid contracting, internships, etc - do not \"invite to volunteer\" but engage and an equal when relevant.

Sexual discrimination and harassment.  Having been on the receiving end of unwanted sexual harrassment by a faculty member during my MA as well as discrimination over years as a female in the field (I specialize in geohysical survyes - beginning in the 1990s there were a few women involved, many more so now - but speaking to my experience) - I feel specific training / ethics requirements must be developed and required for RPA, academic faculty and students, CRM, etc (I assume State and Fed agencies have their own ethics training)."
"Principle 2, accountability is still at the top of my list especially to Indigenous and other marginalized groups. We still use the word consult, but really need to move toward collaboration instead. Certainly, there is also a link of 5, Intellectual Property, which we still define in terms of rights of the archaeologist rather than those whose past or contemporary lives we might be studying. The definition of stewardship still defines sites, materials, etc. in terms of being beneficial to all people, but really protecting ourselves. Finally we need better understandings of how we treat students and colleagues, from the time we are students through their lifetimes as colleagues or just interested members of the public, which relates to principles 4 & 8."
"Sexual harassment in archaeological field work and academic work, diversity of the professorship, and how to better empower local communities through archaeological work"
"Whether to leave archaeological resources in the ground or to remove them and curate them"
NA
"Stewardship of the archaeological record."
"Sexual harassment, racism, and colonialism (in no particular order)"
NA
"protecting archaeological resources from commercial exploitation and vandalism; promoting inclusion of descendant communities in research, resource management, interpretation; gender equity and changing the current climate of sexual harassment, assault, and discrimination; other forms of harassment, assault, and discrimination (race, ethnicity, class, sexual identity and orientation, ability); workplace safety, equity, income disparity, job security, issues of job security and income/benefits for field techs, contingent faculty, and other job insecure sectors."
"Responsibilities to consult with Indigenous community members and other stakeholders at all phases of fieldwork (pre- and post-excavation). 
Responsibilities to preservation ethic and site stewardship. 
I also consider the communication of information to the broader public to be a primary ethical concern. Visible advocacy for archaeology is part of that communication."
"Discrimination
Harrassment"
NA
NA
NA
"Resource preservation, public education, and interpersonal behaviour"
"People with degrees and no field experience inadvertently doing damage to sites. Need more training."
"Sexual harassment/assault
Lack of enforcement of existing ethical principles (no consequences/accountability)
Lack of genuine engagement with stakeholders (descendent communities, etc)
Lack of engagement with local communities (local referring to where archaeologists live or are employed)

"
NA
NA
"personal data protection"
"Engaging with non-professional archaeologists to protect the archaeological record (discouraging collecting, removing objects from sites) in a way that is productive and not alienating to them. 

Treatment of descendant communities and establishing more equal relationships in the process of knowledge production about the past. Respecting prohibitions against the study of certain types of remains (human, sacred objects/places, etc.)

Harassment and treatment of students and minorities in the field. Both sexual harassment but also improper requests (overworking without compensions0 of more junior team members by senior directors/advisors.  
"
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
"Sexual harassment and assault"
NA
"How to deal with collectors and avocationals, which are sometimes, one and the same."
"Conducting decolonization archaeology
Emphasizing interdisciplinary research with the other sub disciplines of anthropology.
"
"Nagpra, looting, and working with amateur archeologists"
"Working with indigenous communities/Native American artifacts"
"Treatment of students in the field"
NA
NA
NA
"Truth."
"Mismanagement of old collections."
NA
NA
NA
"Concerns about how we treat other members who are different in orientation, ethnic backgrounds, and gender."
NA
NA
"Racism, sexual assault and harassment, safely and respectfully working with interlocutors."
"balancing scientific inquiry with Indigenous concerns"
NA
NA
NA
NA
"Indigenous authority over archaeological remains."
"Many archaeologists as well as funding organizations continue to prioritize work based on \"broader impacts,\" and treat the archaeological record as scientific specimens with little regard for modern or past descendant communities. SAA needs to take a firmer stance on what it means for archaeologists to ethically engage with diverse publics. We need to adopt critical heritage perspectives and abandon perspectives and narratives that treat archaeological materials as national or universal features of heritage."
NA
"sexual harassment & assault"
NA
NA
"Issues regarding"
NA
NA
NA
"Discrimination, violence, and harassment in field settings and in the academy, based on gender, sexual orientation, and religion"
NA
NA
NA
"Honesty, harassment of all kinds, bigotry"
"unqualified Master of Arts people conducting work which requires knowledge and expertise; students are no longer well-trained when they emerge from universities, and the teachers do not have sufficient practical experience.."
"I can't say what the primary ethical concern is but the one that interests me the most relates to antiquities: looting/ the sale of/ the publication of."
"money drives everything!"
NA
NA
"accessibility to the public, paternalistic view of archaeology as owned by the archaeologist, treatment of women,"
"Responsibility for meeting the needs of both professional and public constituencies.  That means the timely publication and dissemination of research data AND making the effort to publish more popular articles and doing public presentation. 

To not do the former is pot hunting, and to not do the latter is making us irrelevant"
"Treatment of staff
Publishing results
Sharing data"
"Non-archaeologists  superiors in private companies who want to 'cut corners' budget-wise on CRM projects."
NA
NA
"Shoddy fieldwork being conducted by poorly trained personnel in the CRM industry"
NA
NA
NA
"1) indigenous issues
2) sexual harassment
3) professionalism in publishing 
4) Protection of resources"
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
"Illegal collection, looting, treasure hunting"
"Copyiing others work"
"protection of archaeological sites and the remains/documents/information retrieved from them"
NA
NA
NA
NA
"Sexual harassment based on the field clothing and undermining individuals based on age and sex.
Older individuals taking advantage of younger individual
Mainly workplace and school place harassment that needs to be addressed through trainings, talks, etc."
"respective treatment of our fellow members and the public"
NA
"Incremental destruction of the archaeological record, much of it signed-off on by \"professional\" archaeologists.
Growing divide between academic, CRM, and amateur archaeologists.
Disgusting exploitation of \"archaeological technicians\" by corporations and agencies.
Agencies following the letter of the law, while clearly ignoring the intent and the underlying conservation ethics.
Declining access to collections because of poor curation or poor relations between agencies, archaeologists, and communities."
NA
NA
"How we use data"
"Proper budgeting for and care of collections to be curated in perpetuity
NAPGRA compliance"
"Site destruction and the illegal antiquities trade, gap between economics of publication and responsibilities for publishing fieldwork"
NA
"Gender equality. Weakening of cultural resource protection laws. Collecting / looting / sale of artifacts."
NA
NA
"-Protecting sites from public -- both collectors and looters.
-Helping the public to understand how removal of artifacts from sites remains a dangerous issue."
"Poor/low pay for professional work in the United States compared to other environmental fields"
NA
"Very important to incorporate. Depends on the region or country.  In central  American countries there is a lot of corruption so we need to teach ethics in university"
NA
"Lack of honesty, integrity, and reproducibility."
NA
"1) Ethical archaeological practices in the field, lab, or in long-term management of archaeological materials
2) Ethical engagement with stakeholders
3) Ethical engagement with other archaeologists"
"Sacrificing quality of research for money."
"Gender bias and sexual harassment is still prevalent in our field. The CRM archaeologists have lost their ethical concern for wanting to find sites for capitalist ventures. While, there are many outstanding archaeologists in CRM who have a far deeper knowledge than even some PhD level archaeologists, it has become common practice to not conduct sound field survey to cut corners. There is a lack of caring for our cultural resources."
"Limited consistency for treatment between underwater cultural heritage sites and terrestrial sites."
NA
"gender inequities in terms of pay, job status, and unequal work/service load in academia; failure to realize the inequity of income in the US when considering costs of membership/conferences; lack of diversity in the discipline"
"This will be an unpopular answer, but the growing number of self-proclaimed activist archaeologists is dangerous.  These folks often put their agenda before their mid-range theory and academic rigor.  They also diminish the profession by making all these claims about what archaeology can and must do.  They inevitably fail.  Having said archaeology must be activism or it is nothing at all, having failed to solve any major world problem (have failed in their activism), where does that leave the profession?  How do we justify archaeology when so many are preaching that only activist archaeology counts?  The half-assed liberalism -- I can solve the world problems of mass migration by synthesizing archaeological studies of migration, or I can make racism go away by proclaiming myself an activist archaeologist or I can eliminate world sexism by donning my Activist Archaeology cape -- is dangerous and leads to poor archaeology.  It also oversells what archaeology can and should do, and that sets us up for the weakening or elimination of Section 106 and such.

"
"repatriation"
"As an outsider to this profession, I see a common problem that surfaces in other fields, the use of materials and artifacts that one does not hold the right of ownership to."
"Taking of artifacts from archaeological sites"
"In CRM, doing the ethical thing can bog an archaeologist down with extra paperwork or work (calling people at various levels of local and state government) to resolve an issue. With very little follow up for the initiating archaeologist."
"Lack of substantive Native American consultation with no blame cast towards any party. Pressure to cut corners in CRM."
"Having a safe work place environment. There are too many cases/situations involving sexual harassment and no platform to mitigate these problems."
"The remaining bias between Pre-Contact and historic sites with some Archaeologists. The broader ethical problems regarding potential unequal treatment of archaeologist's careers and progression depending on their workplace, program of study, background, etc. This ranges from mistreatment of students/young professionals personally to any group not being qualified/able to study their own culture and sites."
"Safety in all its facets - physical and psychological 
Resource stewardship and conservation
Outreach and Public Accountability"
NA
"Working with collectors
Dissemination of research"
"Under representing site significance in some instances to appease clients in an attempt to ensure additional contracts are awarded."
"While there is tremendous work by many professionals in the arena of public education and engagement--there is still more to be done to keep in touch with the many publics who are stakeholders in our work.

I believe there is more to be done to encourage and enable scholars to use collections of material culture already in repositories. There is still a strong bias toward field projects defining careers and success in the discipline.

The sustainability of our archaeological undertaking needs more attention, particularly on the subject of stewarding collections and supporting documentation in perpetuity. More advocacy for collections holding institutions and the resources that they need is essential to preserve the archaeological record.

In the first go round of the Ethical Principles--there was not a principle of scholarship and integrity. I have always found that to be a glaring oversight given it is a basic tenant of the education we all received, but never explicitly enshrined in the principles.

There are still inherent inequities in the academy, in agencies, and in other organizations where archaeologists work. There is still much to do in creating fair professional relationships between those in the profession whose positions grant them more power over those whose positions place them in positions of less power, particularly with regards to the access of opportunities and resources."
"Interactions between archaeologists and descendent American Indian communities."
"Nonmaleficence. Respect for the archaeological record. Respect for colleagues, the public, and descendant communities."
"Sexual Harassment and Assault"
NA
"working as an advocate with descent communities vs. stakeholder groups."
"Regulation of Title IX requirements and protecting rights of students, faculty and staff"
NA
"I think this is a difficult question to answer because so many of the SAA's principles are interrelated.
For social and political reasons I think that accountability should be every archaeologists' primary ethical concern. Anthropology and archaeology are colonial fields in the United States, the power dynamics are not even, and it is up to archaeologists to be aware of the destructive nature of our science and how that affects other groups (especially indigenous groups).
For the field/science itself I think that stewardship and public education/outreach are primary ethical concerns. Stewardship on all fronts would be improved if all archaeologists were invested in public education and outreach (I'm thinking in particular of in situ archaeological protection and conservation). I also believe that not enough archaeologists are invested in the long-term protection of the archaeological record after it has been dug up.... collection management is something that all of us should be invested in."
NA
"Sexual harassment, antiracism, necessity of engaging descendants and other publics,"
"Descent community involvement in the study of their histories, and control of their cultural patrimony."
"How we handle sexual harassment and assault in archaeology."
NA
"Recognition of diverse values of archaeological resources, giving adequate voice to descendant communities, a focus on preservation of archaeological resources in place as well as data from sites that are excavated, timely reporting of results of fieldwork, information sharing with  the public, curation of collections"
"consultation and integration of bona fide multiple cultural interests; integrity and preservation of resource sites and natural settings; integrity and preservation of curated resources; continuing professional education and enhancing public awareness."
"Conducting quality archaeology with integrity. Not letting business/clients make decisions for the archaeologists."
"Sexism, harassment, racism, looting,"
"Collaboration with descendant communities, safe harassment-free workplaces, and public reporting of research"
"Ensuring indigenous communities are given an active e role in archaeological work and knowledge creation."
"Working in respectful collaboration with indigenous communities (esp. re: aDNA etc.)
Sexual harassment
Collecting/Looting and constructive engagement with hobbyists
"
"Too many new projects digging up material while old collections rot in storage. There needs to be incentives to study old collections."
"Larger inequity in the field, systematic racism and sexism. Hierarchical structure of departments lending themselves to sexual harassment. Grossly inadequate responses to harassment and sexual misconduct. System of patronage in terms of getting any federal grants...when the money is very scarce, those resources tend to follow social networks (unsurprisingly).  This is an issue in that schools and programs best able to work those networks and apply for grants are R1s...populated by white older guys (who are also on review panels)...so yeah, it's a problem if you're not in an R1 or a woman, or a person of color, etc.  Ongoing issues with inadequate NAGPRA training and understanding actual representation and inclusion issues here."
"Not allowing contract constraints to alter archaeological results or result in cutting corners, especially with the curation of collections."
"Inclusion of tribes and descendant communities. Sexual harrassment. Treatment of students, interns, field techs."
NA
"Gender and racial discrimination"
"Upholding Indigenous and other descendant communities' rights to self determination with respect to their cultural heritage and promoting safer and more equitable relationships within our community of practice."
"stewardship
intellectual property
public outreach/engagement

and what is missing from the current principles is reponsibilities to descendent communities"
"NAGPRA as well as other human remains issues, But most strongly curation and collections management, the curation crisis, the use of existing collections in research are all issues of today. Primarily how we use collections and how we care for them. This becomes another problem since few schools educate students of archaeology about curation and ethical collections management. We are not doing well in this area!!!"
"Adequacy of work towards addressing archaeological sites/problems
Publication standards
Fair treatment of archaeologists by those in a position of power"
"-racial/gender equality and inclusivity
-community engagement
-access to public resources
"
"Underbidding and shoddy work by some contractors.
Ongoing harassment and discrimination, particularly in field and academic settings against women.
The lack of racial and ethnic diversity in the field.
The lack of outreach and dissemination to the public of information gained with public funding.
Lack of meaningful outreach to Tribes when projects might affect them.  This is improving with legislation and policy, but not always with action."
"Working with Indigenous communities
Intellectual property rights for Indigenous communities and individuals
"
"Sexism, abuse of power, predation, careerism, loss of the archaeological record"
"Teaching students that the profession of archaeology actually does have ethical standards.
Holding professors to those same standards, especially concerning fieldwork and artifact collection and NAGPRA issues on federal lands.
Having a Fair way to sanction unethical behavior for both students and professionals
Adhering to ethnically standards regarding race, gender, sexual preference, and sexual harassment, especially in fieldwork"
"Archaeological firms conducting poor quality archaeology through the bidding process. Second, issues surrounding sexism in archaeology (in the workplace, in the university setting, and in the literature), issues relating to colonialism, and indigenous rights."
"Engagement, consultation, and collaboration with stakeholder communities"
"Redefining archaeology out of existence by stretching it, ethically, to satisfy to many agendas."
"Respect for indigenous communities; awareness and better response to sexual harassment in academia; repatriation"
"Treatment of data (collection, curation, publication)
Involvement with those closest to the research (descendant communities, current residents, people impacted by results)
Interactions with students and colleagues (equity, honesty, safety)"
"I think what we do with human remains, especially those of Native Americans, is still a huge ethical concern that is not universally handled well."
"Gender equality
Appropriate and meaninful consultation with interested parties"
"Safety for women, people of color, and the LGBTQ community within archaeology."
"1. Looting and the black market for stolen antiquities.

2. Lack of consultation with tribes---it is still a problem.

3. Lack of training in archaeological curation and conservation. Still too much emphasis on excavation and no follow-up. 

4. Lack of people of color in the discipline overall.

5. Little to no stewardship of older collections; a case of benign neglect, which is unethical."
"Working, finding common ground, with the collecting community"
"There are really two threads here, the ethics of how we approach the archaeological record and how we approach other archaeologists. The primary ethical concern for me is balancing these two threads as we have tended to focus on our ethical responsibility to the archaeological record (stewardship, accountability, publishing) and diminished the value and importance of our ethical responsibilities towards each other."
NA
"Failure to complete field work by appropriate analysis, publication as well as preparing collections for museum storage and future research. Prioritizing museum collections research over new field work when possible. ."
"Detaching (non archaeological) political interest from the objectives and ethics of archaeological practice."
NA
"failures in training and leadership; failure  to document"
"Sexual harassment
Indigenous sovereignty and collaboration
Community outreach and research dissemination 

"
"Abuse of power particularly as leader/faculty towards students or those without power,
"
"Very concerned how our ethics intersect with the interests of Native Americans. Also with CRM."
"A general resistance to ethics. It seems to me that the concerns are many, but can be generally lumped into the categories of diversity and gender. As we have seen, sexual harassment is a major problem, but we have done very little to address it. Why? The inability to support and enforce our ethics is a real problem. Ethics mean nothing if there is no enforcement mechanism. As far as I can tell there has been no reduction in sexual harassment after including it in the Principles. So, how do you give it \"teeth\"? It is a major problem for the discipline. I don't feel comfortable encouraging my students to go into the field and can only encourage them to go certain field schools (mostly because I know the directors or they have very clear statements AND mechanisms for addressing harassment). IFR is also no longer one of them, which means that there is almost no centralized field school tool. This is all because of a general ethics malaise that has infiltrated the field because we cannot ensure that our own ethics are being followed."
"The treatment of women and minorities in the field, and the respectful consideration of the communities in which excavations are being conducted."
"Protection of human subjects
Representation of under-represented people in the field 
Accountability of anthropologists - leaving the field in a better place for those who follow 
Buying artifacts/protection of the archaeological record 
Public outreach, education, publication of materials for general consumption and peer-reviewed materials  
Proper training
"
"harassment"
"consultation, engagement, and respect for indigenous communities
heritage preservation and protection
enhancing diversity and equity in our field
there are others"
"Harassment"
"Finding and implementing best ways of dealing with descendant communities"
"The ridiculous notion that many academic archaeologists still see themselves as somehow superior to CRM archaeologists. 

As a  CRM archaeologist working in an academic setting for thirty-five years, I not only have the academic credentials that my faculty colleagues have, but I also an expert in construction principles and impact planning, environmental law, macro-budgeting, collections management (which most archaeologists are NOT trained to deal with), and large-scale personnel and project management. And, I am HAZMAT trained to respond to archaeological situations that are potentially unsafe.

"
NA
"- The ethics of CRM work and how pressures of low bids/costs intersects with preservation, education, and research

- How to actively incorporate \"Me Too\" (rather than waiting out the old-guard to retire)

- How to re-invigorate public interest in archaeology without encouraging looting"
"

"
"Sexual harassment and sexual assault"
"discrimination and harassment"
"Using the best techniques for representing the archaeological context and not falsifying data."
"Equity in the field, conservation, government"
"Community perspectives in research, data management, harassment and bullying"
NA
"ownership of cultural remains, and the legal differences between countries
"
"Improving relationships with, and increasing involvement of Native and descendant communities; addressing sexual harassment and assault in academia, the government, and private practice; addressing issues of looting and the black market; addressing misrepresentation of archaeology (pseudoarchaeology) and descendant communities (racism) across media, both traditional and new social media."
"1) Sharing knowledge between archeologist and indigenous or descendent communities - power sharing and knowledge transfer. Community based practice and a fair hearing for the voices that are muted or ignored in archeological discourse. 


2) The intersection of vandalism, looting, conflict, and the antiquities trade. 

3) Responsible collecting and curation practices; sustainability of collections.

"
"Unethical excavations without prior research on previous work at site and/or region.  Large field school programs for profit are becoming a real ethical problem.  As well as field schools taught for student credit, not research purposes."
"Relationships between archaeologists and descendant communities
Harassment and discrimination, especially in the context of fieldwork"
"Respect for persons, including respect for younger and less established practioners, especially with respect to gatekeeping through dismissive peer reviewing on the basis of norms and credentials rather than substance."
"Harassment and discrimination are the primary ethical concerns. We must study the condition, create policies, believe survivors, and enforce sanctions."
"As someone who works in CRM,  the \"race to the bottom\" has been my primary concern. Firms low-balling bids to get work and then not having the proper funds to complete the work to standards so they don't. We don't see the local, state, or federal agencies holding these firms to the standards and calling them out for blatantly not meeting them. It is devastating to see the poor work from these firms allowing the destruction of important cultural resources. It is frustrating to watch sites that we have recorded and know will be significant given to these firms, who charge half the cost, for further study and immediately deem these sites insignificant to please the client. And it is even more frustrating that these same companies become a joke among other firms for the poor quality of their work, and yet agencies, at all levels, continue to do nothing. 
Exacerbating this situation is the lack of funding in general that pushes the field to use volunteers to do what should be considered skilled tasks. And while I love and sincerely appreciate the work that volunteers do and realize that some will come to know more than many trained professionals, that is the exception. We devalue our education, training, and expertise when we use volunteers to do a majority of the work because we are not given funding. And we encourage continued under funding by promising we can find volunteers to do the same work for free. 
The lack of funding and use of volunteers also means that field techs can be treated as disposable...people to be worked until they break for low pay, temporary employment, and no benefits. All of these issues contribute to the continued \"race to the bottom\" that does a disservice to our entire field by eroding the trust of the clients who wonder why one firm can do what they see as the same work for much less and with better result (no further work needed); the agencies, with whom we must negotiate the least amount of work for the least amount of money for those clients; and the public, who expects us to protect cultural resources."
"Adequate and timely reporting on surveys and excavations remains a problem among CRM and academic archaeologists."
"There is a movement to block research materials, such as ethnographies, from being studied unless there is tribal approval. Also in Oregon, site reports with burials cannot be looked at in some cases unless the tribe is contacted, and these records are 'scrubbed' from the database and GIS so we don't even know if there might be something there. I want to know the ethical underpinnings of this, as it seems counter to scientific research. Is it about religious sensitivities? Is this a separation of church and state issue? Also, no one wants to talk about it in the administration at SHPO, it is in house decision making."
"1.  Interactions between amateurs/collectors and professional archaeologists
2.  Consultation between museums/repositories, researchers, and descendant communities"
"preserving, protecting, and providing equitable access to the past"
"Inclusion"
"Diversity, inclusion, and sexism."
"Preservation and site destruction.
Trivialization and boilerplate approaches in Cultural Resource Management.
Racism and sexism in the work place."
"Collaboration with Indigenous communities, data sharing, safe work place for all."
"1) Museums and other collections that have no ethics policies, or policies that allow great freedom in deaccession decision making.

2) Repatriation--the SAA survey a few years ago showed that most SAA members thought that repatriation was good, but were generally unfamiliar with NAGPRA or the mechanics of international repatriation. Also, institutions that have maintained a retentive philosophy regarding NAGPRA collections.

3) Site vandalism and looting, and the exchange of stolen objects, especially in recovery of objects stolen from sites or museums where the legal ownership is hazy in some way.

4) Publication of articles and books that may reveal special Native American knowledge or practices without consultation with appropriate tribes.

5) Sexual harassment and discrimination, especially in field school situations."
"Sustainability"
"Integrity and professionalism as a responsibility of SAA membership"
"Putting the client's interest over the resources we are supposed to be protecting."
"Inappropriate faculty/student interactions."
"When consultants in archaeological resource protection cases provide legal testimony on behalf of those charged with destroying our heritage. These \"experts\" are most often not experienced or knowledgeable about the regional archaeology, but nevertheless feel qualified to moderate its destruction, or assist in its looting.

When academics fail to abide fully with the terms of their federal permits. I am aware of several collections being held illegally in garages for decades. Reports from multiple year excavations from field schools never being submitted to the land managing agency. The propriety sequestering of data from public lands for the exclusive use of one university, while refusing to provide that data to actual owner. Widespread sharing of data owned by the federal government and protected against unauthorized release. The posting of site location information and confidential reports in publicly accessible online forums. 

"
"Decolonization
Appropriate treatment of human remains in state, local, and private contexts
Representation in the field - gender, race, age, cultures, communities, etc.
Sexual Assault
Power dynamics 
Alcoholism
Professionalism of specific subfields - especially \"public archaeology\" and \"archaeology education\"
Appropriate use and updating of Secretary of Interior standards.
"
"The rush to get the work done rather than taking the time to do the best/better job, particularly in CRM.  This of course does no apply to all archaeologists,but is too common.  Also, research often is by rote rather than trying to be innovative at look at the data from different perspectives."
"Reforming a culture that tolerates sexual harrassment and abuse. Field schools, class rooms, labs, and field crews need to be safe and transparent spaces. 

Also we need to start actively pushing to use more culturally sensitive terminology. Not s single archaeologist should be using the term \"prehistoric\" in their writings."
"Working to ensure the conservation and wise use of the archaeological record through legal protections.  Ensuring that collections and their associated records are maintained in such a way as to maximize their accessibility and utility for future research long term. Providing quality information to the public about the results of previous and ongoing archaeological work -- In the end, they are paying for it; what are they getting in return?  Being sensitive to the concerns and interests of local communities and descendant communities when designing archaeological research and fieldwork."
"Illegal trafficking in antiquities
Lack of appropriate consultation with indigenous groups
Discrimination and harassment in the workplace and while doing fieldwork"
"assuring positive treatment of both the archaeological record and humankind's material patrimony"
"Hard to say, but since I study pre-contact Americas, I will go with indigenous rights/ collaborating with indigenous people."
"1) The duty of archaeologists as public educators - especially when it comes to how to encourage stewardship
2) The interactions between archaeologists and \"collectors\"
3) (Here in the West) artifacts and sites between 50 - 100 years old aren't approached with the same anthropological concern as prehistoric sites are. My concern here is that archaeologists are privileging some histories and cultures through CRM."
"I think it's twofold. I have concerns about some practitioners, specifically with regards to poor recordkeeping and poor/no data dissemination, but also with avocational archaeologists, looters, etc. destroying the archaeological record.  Both are damaging but in different ways."
"Do no harm. Seriously reflecting on the impact your findings will have on descendent communities. Forming ethical relationships with those near your fieldwork. Including international archaeologists and elevating minority voices. Also, the field is awful regarding diversity and inclusion especially when it comes to women of color. Sexual harassment and sexual misconduct, power dynamics, and structural inequality in archaeology/anthropology/academia."
"Gender equity, colonialist policies, creating a scientifically literate public"
"Yo pienso que deberia permitirse publicar a mas arqueologos que hacen investigaciones en Amrica. Dado que es necesario divulgar sus conocimientos"
"Sexual harassment at all levels in the academy and in CRM"
"Doing the minimum, at best, in engaging the public and descendant communities."
"- Long delays between accumulation and publication of data in academic contexts.

- Inadequate data sharing and transparency in research methods (e.g. providing databases to back up published results).

- Lack of accountability for project directors, crew chiefs, professors, etc. who sexually harass, bully, and/or abuse subordinates in the context of archaeological work.

- Wage stagnation and general poor treatment of entry-level workers within the context of cultural resource management.

- Lack of transparency and accountability within the SAA itself."
"In archaeology: sexual assault and harassment in the field in general and field work specifically. Knowledge appropriation (of Indigenous knowledge). Lack of focus on decolonizing the field of archaeology. No attention to creating anti-racist ethical guidelines. Little visibility around creating inclusive and accessible conferences."
"Treatment of and engagement with local communities, especially indigenous and marginalized ones.
Promotion of inclusivity and diversity."
"Commercial selling of artifacts. Exploiting archaeological knowledge for personal gain, not advancement of science. Sexist, racist and gender bias in the hiring and funding of legitimate archaeological research. Television.s exploiting of archaeological sites for sensationalism, yet ignoring sound archaeological background. Native Americans interference with archaeological investigations, research, DNA studies, misuse of NAGPRA, denying  access to sites because \"all sites are sacred\".  Rubbish!  These sites and the data they contain \"belong\" to all Americans, all peoples of all nations, not a disgruntled minority of Tribal folks."
"Preservation"
"The formation of State biyaws concerning excavation and removal of artifacts  from their country of origin"
"Wages paid to field techs, sexual discrimination, racial discrimination, putting the client before the archaeological resource"
NA
"The outrageous cost of field school that keeps low income students from attending."
"Fair wages in CRM
Overuse of adjunct status for academics leading to exploitation and unfair wages
Time and $$ pressure in CRM leading to inadequate time for analysis and write-up
Academics contracts not specifying advising, graduate supervision, etc. as part of job responsibilities so shortchanging both professors and students
Decreasing funds for archeologists specifically and CRM specialists more generally in federal government"
"Responsibilities to the public, especially descendant communities."
"Consideration and care regarding the connections of living peoples or descendant communities to the past, including their inclusion in research concerns (including the limits of regulatory practices in requiring these considerations or care)

Material-culture collections for gain, whether commercial or scientific"
NA
"Sexual harassment and equal pay"
NA
"Weakness in the positions of organizations like this one who tend to be unwilling to vocalize and act when faced with what should be seen as an opportunity to do so."
NA
"The way we treat one another, i.e., other archaeologists/historians. Stop using knowledge - mere data - as social leverage and ego props. Realize that logical positivism is over and is dehumanizing us. Make this training every bit as important as every other type of training."
"Gender and Ethnicity"
NA
"Harassment
Gender Equity
Unacknowledged Privilege
Community Engagement
Indigenous Rights
Value of Excavation over Analysis and Curation
Curation Crisis
Devaluation of Legacy Collections

"
"Native American concerns. Looting and illegal trade in artifacts. Removal of existing protections for cultural resources."
"Sexism, especially in fieldwork contexts, and Whiteness/racism"
"It's hard to limit myself to on primary ethical concern, so I've listed my top concerns in no particular order:

Accessibility: It has become evident to me that archaeology is not always accessible to a variety of stakeholder, particular indigenous and historically marginalized groups, to low-income students, and people with disabilities. I have a lower middle class background and while I was able to pay for my fieldschool, it was a financial burden. This seems to be the case for many, and there are many others who would like to pursue fieldschools but can't due to the cost. I think there needs to be a concerted effort to fund training for individuals interested in archaeology but can't afford the costs associated with traditional archaeological fieldschools/training.

Safe working environment: After last year's SAA meetings, the recent story about the Harvard Anthropology department, and numerous other examples it has become widely known that there is an issue of sexual harassment and abuse within archaeology. I do think this is changing as more people have become aware of it, but this seems to be a long-standing issue in archaeology, tied particularly to the hierarchical power structure of academia and field research. 

Merging engagement and scientific research: I personally see archaeology as a scientific endeavor. However, this does not mean that I think archaeology is apolitical, or mutually exclusive from collaborative/engaged archaeology and working with native communities. However, there seems to be rift developing where archaeologists either have to be fully immersed and dedicated to engagement, or objective scientists that do have little to no interaction with native groups. I do not think there needs to be such a stark divide. This pertains especially to ancient DNA. I think it is possible to conduct ancient DNA studies that are both scientifically grounded and meet ethical standards for working with human remains"
"Sexual harassment and discrimination, looting archaeological sites, selling and trading artifacts, disregard for professionals to adhere to professional standards, lack of disseminating research"
"The issue that RPA certification automatically means that an archaeologist is ethical. I find it to be almost the opposite."
"Qualified practitioners doing the work as opposed to people with minimum training. Disposition of human remains and artifacts to appropriate personnel and agencies."
"There are many, but in my field (Mesoamerican archaeology) we are very interested in decolonization and providing more access to those traditionally shut out of the academic community. A lot of the conversations have focused on finding a way for the people in the areas in which we work have access to research and to have access to archaeological training if they wish to become become researchers and conduct field work. Also something on our mind is repatriation of looted objects, as well as preventing the art market from fueling further looting (which can end up funding violence and political corruption in our regions as well). Also an important ethical concern is continuing to make our field safer for women and people of color - in the field, in conferences, in the classroom."
"Equity between archaeologists and descendant communities (eg. NAGPRA/repatriation from collections, building equitable relationships between archaeologists and indigenous people and people of color especially)"
"balancing archaeological scientific needs vs. tribal values  vs  agency directions & requirements"
"The most pressing ethical concern facing the field today is how to move beyond rhetorical disciplinary preoccupations that simply reproduce hierarchies and privileges. Archaeologists need to  position the values of equality and freedom from all discrimination at the center of archaeological thinking and practice."
"1.  archaeological projects after excavation -- abandoned without puiblication

2. excavation materials ( pottery, bone, stone, etc. ) languishing in storerooms after excavation, often lacking
publication and study

Without publication , the excavation is merely destructionm"
NA
"Recognizing and behaving thoughtfully with respect to the consequences of our work on living people should be very high on the list of ethical concerns for archaeologists. I also believe that we have obligations to our students, colleagues, and the archaeological record, but that those obligations have long overshadowed the sociopolitical context of archaeology in the present. A research project that is well-researched, excavated properly, documented, published, and archived can nonetheless be carried out in a way that avoidably fuels political unrest, endangers local residents, or harms Indigenous descendant communities."
"1 - Political pressure on government agencies to not comply with existing laws & regulations

2 - Various issues related to Native Americans and sacred sites"
"Working with descendent and local communities; making data open access; protecting cultural resources from looting and illegal sale"
"Sexual assault, gender based harassment, classism and racism and the lack of codified ethics in these concerns"
"Determination of artifact ownership for abandoned or neglected collections and explicitly emphasizing the importance of maintaining digital records."
"(these are not ranked)

to promote ethical, best practices in archaeological fieldwork and reporting (taking into account the differing perspectives of 
our responsibilities toward all stakeholders in the past that is the subject of archaeology
to promote training in ethical behaviors for students and practitioners of archaeology
to protect and advocate for appropriate treatment of the archaeological record and work against its destruction
to promote appropriate curation of artifacts and associated documentation and access to same
to make the results of archaeological work available to stakeholders (including the public)
to work toward elimination of all forms of harassment and inequity in archaeology
"
"There are so many. Where to begin..."
"Protection of the archaeological record. Fair treatment of employees."
"Sexual harassment, exploitation of graduate and undergraduate student labor,"
"In no specific order... 1) Equity, Discrimination, and Sexual Harassment, 2) fair pay, safe working conditions, and reasonable work hours for field technicians and field directors in CRM, and 3) lack of consultation or involvement of descendant communities by those conducting non-CRM archaeological research"
"pressure from agencies, developers, permittees, licensees to expedite S106 compliance where complex issues are present and simple solutions are not feasible nor desirable; conflicting input from tribes and interest groups that impact decisions on proper treatment of archaeological and historic properties"
"Repatriation. Consultation and follow through with stakeholder communities."
"The use of student labor by universities and agencies to attempt to keep research cost as low as possible, whereas the cost of senior researchers, land managers, and administrators are very high."
NA
"Equality for all ages, sexes, genders, and ethic affiliations"
NA
NA
NA
"Ensuring fair representation of women and minorities in archaeology; curbing harassment in research and contract archaeology; preventing destruction/exploitation of archaeological sites worldwide; ensuring that our profession is respectful of and constructively engages concerns of Native Americans, descendant communities, and other stakeholders."
NA
"Sharing information with the public, transparency, sexual harassment, illegal sales of artifacts, looting of sites, battling pseudoarchaeology and nonsense television programs, plagiarism, discrimination, equal opportunity and ending racism."
NA
NA
"gender harassment,"
NA
"Rubrics for success not being developed collaboratively with local or Indigenous community partners."
NA
NA
NA
NA
"Continued misuse of Native American human remains and funerary objects. 
Growing public interest in archaeology that results in both looting of artifacts and misuse of the past, and archaeologists' failure to speak to the public in ways that might channel archaeological interest in positive ways.
Sexual harassment and discrimination.
Continued exclusion of people of color from our profession and from archaeological dialogues.
Lack of attention to threats to archaeology internationally.
"
"Decolonizing training and literature 
Lack of diversity and inclusivity in the field 
Lack of publicly available research
Learning how to helpfully and effectively work with descendant communities"
NA
NA
"Treatment of personnel and resources"
NA
"relationship between archaeologists and communities local to sites under investigation or descendant communities"
NA
NA
"-repatriation
-true partnerships with descendant communities (decolonizing anthropology)
-sexual harassment and assault issues (IFR issues, Harvard professors, the list goes on and on). 
-curation and collections management (the curation crisis)"
"how people treat other people (this is a universal ethical concern)
destruction of the archaeological record through poor or hurried excavation technique
destruction of the archaeological record through lack of or poor conservation and curation
rights of publication versus rights of access to publications"
"Respect for the work of colleagues, respect and conservation of the heritage under study: objects and monuments"
"Protection of archaeological resources from corporate-funded destruction and 'development'."
"I'm not currently a practicing field archaeologist. From when I was 10+ years ago, I was aware of concerns with how archaeologists managed their work in response to pressures from developers (pressure being to not see things, not report them, not require monitors, and similar); how archaeologists respected and interacted with stakeholders and associated communities (appropriate consultation); and ensuring good documentation and curation of the sites we work on and materials we collect (particularly under strained budgets and pressures from developers). I expect these pressures still exist, but I can't speak to them directly.

Publication concerns such as plagiarism and appropriate use/purchase of publications for teaching are perennial, but have also taken new shapes in our more digital world. I wouldn't call them the major issues, but because they are essential to building both careers and trust within the profession, they should be called out for attention more often than they currently are.

Gender-based harassment and discrimination are major issue and ones I know the SAA has been/is struggling with. We need constant vigilance for these, and an ethical culture that creates equality (at minimum) for those who report having been harmed by them.

We are also living in an era of climate change and - as I type - a US that may finally be waking up to its centuries of racial inequality and discrimination. We should ensure that our ethical principles require clear and equal (at minimum) attention to communities and peoples whose voices have been muffled. While ethical principles should not prescribe research topics or products, archaeologists should ensure that our science is clear and accessible with respect to major issues facing society. It may also become an ethical issue to ensure that equitable portions of archaeological effort are divided between basic research and research that is applied to major issues facing society."
"Sexual harassment, journals publishing poor-quality research, politics in academia."
"working with indigenous communities, working with stakeholders, making research accessible, overworking students, sex-based discrimination and harassment"
"I see lots of folks concerned about sexual harassment. So I would call that the primary ethical concern. I know diversity is another issue and not sure if that's considered ethics or just an acknowledgement of our need for more inclusion."
"The limited attention given to and treatment of Indigenous concerns as somehow separate from traditional archaeology.

The treatment of women in the discipline both in terms of sexual harassment and academic advancement 

Communication and engagement with the public"
"Problems exist in at least three areas.1.Lack of clear guidance regarding situational ethics.2. A lack of concordance between archaeological ethics and Museum ethics. 3. Slow incorporation of ethical statements regarding harassment. 

A possible fourth problem relates to the concept of \"in-situ preservation.\"  There is a need for clear guidelines that do not interfere with requirements of archaeological research."
"access to collections and records, transparency"
"Equity and diversity. Protection of heritage from for-profit. Appropriate community engagement guidelines."
"Education and stewardship"
"Discrimination 
Harassment 
Intimidation 
"
"(1) commercialization of the past, (2) interests of science vs. descendant communities."
"Sexual harassment, abuses of power, respect for tribal sovereignty"
"How we engage with local communities, integrity in our research (in all aspects of it), relationships with colleages and students, preserving records."
"In my view, archaeologists should work on issues that are of concern and interest to local communities.  Too many archaeologists focus only on issues that advance their careers."
"all the current ethics
PLUS relevance of what we do to modern challenges, e.g., climate change, racism, inequality"
"Ethical engagement and consultation with descendant communities
Transparency and reproducibility of data
Protecting against site destruction and sale of artifacts
Protecting sensitive information (culturally sensitive or location, etc)
Sexual harassment and discrimination
Racism in our field and practice"
"I think this is a difficult question to answer because so many ethical dilemmas are entwined. 
Personally I feel that accountability is the most important ethical concern because of the social and political implications for our society and field at large. Anthropology and archaeology are inherently colonial, and I do not think all archaeologists recognize this or necessarily know how to make sure that they are accountable to affected groups (especially indigenous groups) when ideas come into conflict.
That said, I also think that stewardship is a hugely pressing ethical concern. We are often more focused on the in situ archaeological record, including the protection of archaeological sites and the prevention of looting, etc. This is somewhat ironic when many archaeologists don't take the time to fully engage in public education and outreach in an effort to mitigate this problem. As much as in situ preservation is an integral component of stewardship, it is only a portion of the archaeological record and I think overemphasizing this portion of the record is a severe detriment to the stewardship and management of archaeological materials held in collections. Proposals need to include detailed and long-term stewardship/collection management plans."
"responsibilities to descendant communities/stakeholders 
diversity and gender equity in the profession
sexual harassment 
treatment of human remains (discussion of, imagery)"
"Colleague loyalty"
"teaching, training, and career paths"
"Traditional concerns: looting, treasure hunting, commercial salvage of historical shipwreck sites"
NA
NA
"I think there are two - sexual harassment and treatment of graduate students (particularly graduate students who identify as women or who identify as non-binary).  The second set of issues revolves around the engagement of descendant communities in archaeological fieldwork."
NA
"Sexual harassment and gender equality. Both of which fall under patriarchy."
NA
NA
NA
"Based on the SAA's current outlining of ethics, I believe the primary ethical concerns surround the principals of 
 accountability to affected Indigenous peoples, as well as the public. Professional archaeologists and academics need to prioritize and take action to maintain relationships that provide a multi-vocal approach to the production of cultural history."
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
"1. Archaeologists' responsibilities towards the communities in the areas they work
2. Abuse of power by professors/ PIs etc, particularly sexual misconduct"
"white supremacy, sexism, and racism"
NA
"Ensuring archaeological fieldwork is done in a way that balances both a project and the resources."
NA
NA
NA
"The profesionalization of archaeology as a scientific practice"
"Sexual assault, protection of predators, racism, elitism and prejudice based on gender, sex, social class and continuing to accept students into programs when there are not enough jobs."
NA
NA
NA
NA
"ethnocentrism and racial/ethnic and gender biases as well as non-inclusive social networks."
NA
"Colonial attitudes in fieldwork and publication, conference organization, etc."
"Fairness and equality"
"Doing the minimal, at best, in engaging the public and descendant communities."
"Equitable treatment according to age, ethnicity, gender, and other social distinctions; fair access to heritage and protection of indigenous/traditional heritage rights; preservation and acknowledgement of heritage as a human right; proper treatment, curation, and disposal, where applicable, of archaeological materials and other tangible components of cultural heritage"
NA
"sexual harrassment

diversity

working with collectors

site preservation"
"harassment"
NA
"Sexual and identity based misconduct. Cooperation with Indigenous communities"
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
"The biggest concern I have personally is the increased corporatization and bottomfeeding in CRM archaeology, which makes it difficult to carry out scopes of work that adequately address the potential for significant archaeological resources to exist in the particular APE."
NA
"sexual inequity, racial inequity"
"Intellectual property in the internet
Sexual harrasment in the field"
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
"Specific to CRM: producing quality, scientific work, and valuing that over the priorities of clients/developers."
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
"Professionalism"
"Political Advocacy, racial inclusion, public outreach, and accountability."
NA
NA
NA
NA
"respect and order"
"Protecting cultural resources and continuing to find new sites and information in an era of cutbacks and lack of funding for heritage.
Appropriately involving First Nations groups in archaeological projects where there are appropriate tiggers that require consultation. How do we define what the triggers are?"
NA
NA
"the continued use of distancing language the creates positionality of direct and/or indirect power structures (dominate/suppressed).  Past generations of professional, particularly in anthropology and archaeology, by the nature of the academic process create 'specialists' and 'experts on the subject of Other people (their lives, belongings, thoughts, etc.).  The development of Codes of Ethics by- and for- these same experts reaffirms positionality.  Repeatedly the result is an academic Expert makes a declarative statement \"X is true!\" and the Tribe or decedents of the 'subject people' says, \"No, that is not true.  This is true!\".  Immediately there is a conflict.  Additionally, 'experts' will chose to research a subject that is taboo to a community and perceived to be inappropriate to be discussed by the uninitiated.  Those communities have no control over the dispersal of that information and are left vulnerable and even sensationalized.  

Today's Tribes and Indigenous nations have withstood plagues, systematic genocide, reservations, and educational systems, all designed to remove them from existence.  there for what is held in community (knowledge, language, understanding, belongings, etc.) is highly intimate and protected.  When specialists flex their expertise it is a dominating act.  When Codes of Ethics are developed one-on-one with the nations with whom you work there will begin to be a balanced understanding of HOW to proceed.  for example, the current code (Intellectual Property) does not recognize that information may originate with a Tribe who may not be comfortable with it being shared outside of community."
"Definitely work with indigenous communities as well as respect for burial and ceremonial goods and proper use or not use of that data"
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
"Addressing unequal power structures that plague archaeological teaching, research, publication, funding for research, admitting students to departments for study, and hiring. All are connected."
"Confidentiality, gender inequity in treatment and pay, data theft and abuse"
NA
NA
"Sexual assault/harassment, and the continued support and protection of those found to be credibly guilty of such acts rather than protecting victims 


Lack of inclusion and diversity
"
NA
NA
"Education, privileging the stakeholder, community engagement, preservation"
NA
NA
